4877
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No. 101.
THE INSURANCE (LICENSING AND GOVERNANCE) 
REGULATIONS, 2020
Part I— PrelImInary
1. Title 
2. Application of Regulations
3. Interpretation
4. Meaning of “connected person”
5. Meaning of “independent director”
6. Meaning of “bundled insurance product”
7. Meaning of “group insurance contract”
Part II — ClassIfICatIon of InsuranCe BusIness
8.	 Classification	of	insurance	business
Part III – lICensIng of Insurers, reInsurers and Hmos
9. Application for licence
10. Consideration of application
11. Form of licence
12. Commencement of business
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
SUPPLEMENT No. 28 14th August, 2020
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS SUPPLEMENT
to The Uganda Gazette No. 48, Volume CXIII, dated14th August, 2020
Printed by UPPC, Entebbe, by Order of the Government.
4878
Part IV— B oard  of lICensed  Insurer , reInsurer  and  Hmo
13. Governance framework of licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO
14. Composition of board of licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO
15. Board of licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO
16. Board committees.
17. Responsibilities of senior management 
18.	 Principal	officer
19.	 Chief	finance	officer
Part V — Control funCtIons and related matters
20. Control functions 
21. Combined control functions
22. Key person in control function
23. Key person in risk management function
24. Underwriting and pricing strategy, policies, procedures and controls
25. Internal controls
26. Compliance function
27. Compliance procedures and controls
28. Actuarial function
29. Internal audit function
30. Internal audit reports to be submitted to Authority
31. Whistle blowing policy
32. Responsibility for outsourced activities
33. Requirements for outsourcing of activities
34. Outsourcing policy
35. Outsourcing to be governed by written agreement
36. Costs of supervision of outsourced activities outside Uganda
37. Business continuity plans
4879
38. Remuneration policy 
39. Additional strategies, policies, procedures and controls
40. Risk management strategy
41. Group strategies, policies, procedures and controls 
Part VI — ConduCt of InsuranCe BusIness
42. Application of this Part
43. Objectives of this Part
44. Business conduct policies, procedures and controls
45. Requirements relating to the development of insurance products
46. Approval by Authority of text or format of policy of insurance product 
47. Application for approval of text or format of policy of insurance 
product
48. Variation, suspension, and revocation of approval of text or format of 
policy of insurance product
49. Cancellation of insurance contracts during cooling-off period
50. Requirements relating to marketing of insurance products
51. Key features statement
52. Promotional material
53. Policy to be given to policyholder
54. Policy servicing requirements
55. Insurance claims handling
56. Complaints policy and procedures
57.	 Notification	of	appointment	of	insurance	agents
58. Training obligations 
4880
Part VII— general
59. Group insurance product
60. Bundled insurance products
61. Electronic communications
62. Revocation of SI.66 of 2002
4881
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No. 101.
The Insurance (Licensing and Governance) Regulations, 2020
 (Under section 151 of the Insurance Act, 2017, Act 6 of 2017)
 In exerCIse of the powers conferred upon the Minister, and 
in consultation with the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda, 
these Regulations are made this 17th day of June, 2020.
Part I— PrelImInary
1. Title 
These Regulations may be cited as the Insurance (Licensing and 
Governance) Regulations, 2020.
2. Application of Regulations
Unless expressly provided otherwise, these Regulations apply to 
licensed insurers, reinsurers and HMOs.
3. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Insurance Act, 2017;
“actuary” means a person appointed as an actuary by a licensed 
insurer or HMO in accordance with section 113 of the Act;
“Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory Authority of 
Uganda established by section 10 of the Act; 
“beneficiary”	in	relation	to	an	insurance	contract,	means	a	person	
other than the policyholder—
(a)	 who	 is	entitled	to	a	payment	or	a	benefit	under	the	
insurance contract; or
4882
(b) who, on the occurrence of the insured event, is 
entitled to make a claim against the licensed insurer 
under the insurance contract;
“board” means the board of directors of a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO;
“bundled	 insurance	 product”	 has	 the	 meaning	 specified	 in	
regulation 6;
“Companies Act” means the Companies Act, 2012; 
“connected	person”	has	the	meaning	specified	in	regulation	4;
“control function” means—
(a)	 in	 relation	to	a	licensed	insurer,	a	function	specified	
in section 61(1) of the Act;
(b) in relation to a health membership organisation, a 
function	specified	in	section	61(2)	of	the	Act;
“customer” means—
(a) in the case of a licensed insurer, a policyholder of the 
licensed	insurer	or	a	beneficiary	under	an	insurance	
contract entered into by the licensed insurer, as 
licensed insurer;
(b) in the case of a health membership organisation, a 
member of the health membership organisation; 
“distribute” means the soliciting of applications for, negotiating 
or concluding of insurance contracts by a licensed insurer 
or HMO;
“executive director” means a director of a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO who—
4883
(a) is an employee of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or 
HMO;
(b) not being an employee of the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO, has day to day managerial or 
operational responsibilities;
“group	 insurance	 contract”	 has	 the	 meaning	 specified	 in	
regulation 7; 
“health membership organisation” or “HMO”” has the meaning 
assigned to it in the Act;
“holding company” has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Companies Act, 2012;
“key person in a control function” means an individual appointed 
to undertake, or have responsibility for, and oversight of, 
a control function;
“licenced insurer” means a person who holds a insurers licence 
issued under section 35(1)(a) of the Act; 
“life insurance contract” means an insurance contract that falls 
within any class of life insurance business;
“master policyholder” means the policyholder under a group 
insurance contract;
“non-executive director” means a director who is not an executive 
director;
“outsourcing arrangement” means an arrangement between a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO and a service provider 
under which the service provider, or another person 
acting for the service provider, undertakes an activity on a 
continuing basis that would normally be undertaken by the 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO;
4884
“policyholder” in relation to an insurance contract, means a 
person who entered into the insurance contract with the 
licensed insurer or HMO, if the rights of that person under 
the contract have been assigned or transferred, the person 
who has those rights;
“principal	officer”	in	relation	to	a	licensed	insurer,	reinsurer	or	
HMO, means an individual who, under the immediate 
authority of the directors, either jointly with others or 
alone, is responsible for the conduct of the whole of the 
business of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO;
“promotional material” includes any explanatory, advertising or 
publicity material, in any form; 
“reinsurer” means a person holding a reinsurers licence;
“senior management” in relation to a licensed insurer, reinsurer 
or HMO, means—
(a) the senior managers of the licensed insurer, reinsurer 
or HMO who have collective responsibility for day-
to-day management; or
(b) where the context requires, those senior managers 
having responsibility for particular functions relating 
to the day-to-day management;
“service provider” in relation to an outsourcing arrangement, 
means a person who undertakes an activity for a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO under an outsourcing 
arrangement with the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO; 
“significant	owner”	means	a	person	who	exercises	control	over	
a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO.
“subsidiary” has the meaning assigned to it in the Companies 
Act. 
4885
4. Meaning of “connected person”
	 (1)	 A	 person,	 hereinafter	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 “first	 person”	 is	
connected to another person, hereinafter referred to as the “second 
person” in the following circumstances—
(a)	 where	 the	 first	 person	 and	 second	 person	 are	 associated	
companies; 
(b) where the second person is a company, a partnership or 
limited liability partnership—
(i)	 the	 first	person	is	a	significant	owner	of	the	second	
person; or
(ii)	 the	 first	person	is	a	director,	senior	manager	or	key	
person in a control function of the second person;
(c)	 where	 first	person	and	second	person	are	partners	of	the	
same partnership;
(d)	 where	the	first	person 	is	a	close	family	member	of—
(i) the second person, where that person is an individual; 
(ii)	 an	 individual	 who	 is	 a	 significant	 owner	 of	 the	
second person; or
(iii) an individual who is a director, senior manager or 
key person in control function of the second person.
 (2) For the purposes of subregulation (1), a “close family 
member”, in relation to an individual, means the individual’s—
(a) spouse or former spouse;
(b) children;
(c) parents, including step parents;
(d) legal guardian or former legal guardian;
4886
(e) brothers and sisters; 
(f) grandchildren;
(g) grandparents;
(h)	 first	cousin;
(i) uncles and aunts. 
5. Meaning of “independent director”
“Independent director” in relation to a licensed insurer, reinsurer or 
HMO means a non-executive director who—
(a) does not represent or is not nominated by a major 
shareholder;
(b) has not been employed by the licensed insurer, reinsurer or 
HMO	in	the	past	three	financial	years;
(c) is not an immediate close family member of a person who 
is,	or	was	in	the	past	three	financial	years,	employed	in	an	
executive capacity;
(d) is not a professional advisor;
(e)	 is	not	a	significant	supplier	to,	or	customer	of	the	group;
(f)	 has	no	significant	contractual	relationship	with	the	group;	
(g) is not a connected person in relation to the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO; 
(h) does not receive any remuneration, commission or 
compensation from the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO 
other than remuneration as a director; and
(i) is free from any business or other relationship, which 
could materially interfere with his or her ability to act 
independently;
4887
6. Meaning of “bundled insurance product”
 (1) Subject to subregulations (1) and (2), a bundled insurance 
product is an insurance product that comprises two or more insurance 
products sold as a single insurance product regardless of the category 
or class of the insurance business.
 (2) A non-life insurance product that forms part of a bundled 
product shall be underwritten by a licensed insurer authorised to carry 
on non-life insurance business.
 (3) A life insurance product that forms part of a bundled product 
shall be underwritten by a licensed insurer that is authorised to carry 
on life insurance business. 
7. Meaning of “group insurance contract”
A group insurance contract is an insurance contract where— 
(a) the master policyholder purchases the insurance contract 
on his or her behalf and on behalf of other persons 
who, although not policyholders, are or will become, 
beneficiaries	under	the	contract;	
(b)	 the	 beneficiaries	are	members	of	an	identifiable	group	that	
exists independently of the insurance contract;
(c) the risks insured under the contract are related to the 
common	interests	or	activities	of	the	beneficiaries.
Part II— ClassIfICatIon of InsuranCe BusIness
8.	 Classification	of	insurance	business.	
 (1) In accordance with the Act, insurance business comprises 
two categories of insurance business, that is to say, life insurance 
business and non-life insurance business.
 (2) Life insurance shall comprise the classes and sub-classes 
of	 insurance	 business	 specified	 in	 Part	 I	 of	 Schedule	 1	 to	 these	
Regulations.
4888
 (3) Non life insurance shall comprise the classes and sub-
classes	 of	 insurance	 business	 specified	 in	 Part	 II	 of	 Schedule	 1	 to	
these Regulations. 
Part III — lICensIng of Insurers , reInsurers  and Hmos
9. Application for licence
 (1) For the purposes of section 41(1) of the Act, an applicant 
for a licence to carry on insurance business shall indicate the class of 
insurance business the applicant intends to engage in. 
 (2) An application for an insurers licence, reinsurers licence or 
HMO licence shall be in Form 1 in Schedule 2. 
 (3) The application under subregulation (1) shall be accompanied 
by the following —
(a) the prescribed fee;
(b)	 a	 certified	copy	of	the	applicant’s	certificate	of	incorporation	
or other document by which the applicant is constituted; 
(c) an organogram, in the case of an applicant associated with 
other companies or entities, showing—
(i) all its associated companies and entities and the 
position of each associated company and the 
relationship between the associated companies or 
entities;
(ii) the shareholding held by each of the associated 
companies or entities; and 
(iii) a general description of the activities of each of the 
associated companies or entities;
(d)	 the	details	of	significant	owners;
4889
(e) the details of proposed directors, senior managers, key 
persons in control functions, auditors, actuaries; 
(f) a draft business plan;
(g)	 the	 most	 recent	 audited	 financial	 statements	 of	 the	
applicant	including	the	audited	financial	statements	of	the	
applicant’s holding company and the consolidated group 
financial	statements,	if	any;	
(h) details of the proposed reinsurance arrangements 
or, in the case of a reinsurer, proposed retrocession 
arrangements; and
(i) proof of adequate funds to meet the minimum capital and 
security deposit requirements.  
 (4) The Authority may— 
(a) require an applicant to provide it with such information 
and	 documents,	 in	 addition	 to	 those	 specified	 in	
subregulation (2), as it reasonably requires to determine 
the application; and 
(b) specify— 
(i) the form in which the information or documents are 
to be provided; and
(ii) the period within which the information or documents 
are to be provided; and
(c) require any information or documents provided to be 
verified	in	such	manner	as	it	may	specify.	
10. Consideration of application
 (1) For the purposes of section 43(1) of the Act, the Authority 
receives a complete application where it receives—
(a) a fully and properly completed written application; and
4890
(b) all the documents and information— 
(i)	 specified	by	the	 Act	and	these	Regulations;	and
(ii) that the Authority may require to be provided to it in 
accordance with section 42(g) of the Act.
 (2) In considering an application, the Authority shall, in addition 
to	the	matters	specified	in	section	42	of	the	Act,	satisfy	itself	that—
(a) the applicant will, on the issuance of a licence, be able to 
comply with any conditions the Authority may attach to 
grant of the licence;
(b) the applicant’s ownership, corporate and management 
structure, governance framework, procedures and controls 
or	 proposed	 procedures	 and	 controls,	 financial	 resources	
and its proposed reinsurance or retrocession arrangements, 
are appropriate having regard to the proposed insurance 
business of the applicant; 
(c)	 the	 applicant’s	significant	owners,	directors	and	proposed	
senior managers and key persons in control functions are 
fit	persons	who	satisfy	the	criteria	specified	in	Schedule	2	
of the Act. 
11. Form of licence
For the purposes of section 44(1)(a) of the Act, an insurer’s, reinsurers 
or HMO licence shall be in Form 2 in Schedule 2 to these Regulations. 
12. Commencement of business
 ( 1) An applicant granted a licence shall commence business 
within one hundred and eighty days of obtaining the licence. 
 (2) Where an applicant granted a licence does not commence 
business	within	the	period	specified	in	subregulation	(1),	the	Authority	
may vary, suspend or revoke the licence in accordance with section 45 
of the Act.
4891
Part IV— Board of lICensed  Insurer , reInsurer  and Hmo 
13. Governance framework of licensed insurer, reinsurer and 
HMO
 (1) The governance framework of a licensed insurer, reinsurer 
or HMO established and maintained under section 58 of the Act shall 
provide for—
(a) the apportionment of responsibilities between directors, 
senior management and key persons in control functions; 
and
(b) oversight of senior management. 
 (2) The procedures and controls established and maintained by 
a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO under section 58(2) of the Act 
shall—
(a) provide for— 
(i) the prudent management of its licensed business in 
accordance with sound insurance principles; and
(ii) the effective oversight of its senior management and 
key persons in control functions; and
(b) protect the interests of it’s customers.
 (3) Where a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO carries on 
business through one or more subsidiaries incorporated outside 
Uganda, the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall ensure that the 
subsidiary has an appropriate and effective corporate governance 
framework.
 (4) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall maintain an up-
to-date written record of its governance framework including—
(a) the details of reporting lines including reporting lines for 
key persons in control functions who shall report to the 
board; and
4892
(b) the responsibilities of different members of senior 
management.
14. Composition of board of licensed insurer, reinsurer and 
HMO
 (1) Subject to the Companies Act, 2012, a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO shall have an adequate number of directors— 
(a)	 who	 are	 fit	 persons	 and	 satisfy	 the	 criteria	 specified	 in	
Schedule 2 to the Act;
(b) capable of exercising independent judgment; and
(c)	 who	 collectively,	as	 a	 board,	 have	 a	 sufficient	 spread	 of	
knowledge, skills, experience and understanding of its 
business, and the risks to which it is exposed to ensure that 
the	board	is	able	to	fulfil	its	responsibilities.
 (2) Without limiting the general effect of subregulation (1), a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO, shall, at all times, have—
(a)	 a	 minimum	of	five	directors,	at	least	half	of	whom	shall	be	
resident in Uganda; and
(b)	 sufficient	 non-executive	directors	to	ensure	that	more	than	
half the members are non-executive directors.  
 (3) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall ensure that—
(a) the majority of its directors are independent directors; and
(b) the majority of its directors have experience in one or more 
of	the	following	fields—
(i) insurance;
(ii) actuarial studies;
(iii) law;
(iv)	 banking	or	finance;	
4893
(v) economics; or
(vi)	 such	 other	 field	 as	 the	 Authority	 may,	 in	 writing,	
approve.
	 (4)	 Only	 an	 independent	 director	 qualifies	 to	 be	 appointed	 as	
chairperson of the board of a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO. 
 (5) Where a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO contravenes this 
regulation, the Authority may issue a written directive to the licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO to comply or take such action as shall be 
required by the Authority.
 (6) Where a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO fails to comply 
with a written directive issued by the Authority under subregulation 
(5), the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall be subject to the 
penalty set out in section 121(2) of the Act. 
15. Board of licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO
 (1) Subject to the Companies Act, 2012, the board of a licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO is accountable for the performance and affairs 
of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO, and in the performance of 
its duties is expected to act in good faith, with due diligence and care 
and in the interests of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO.
 (2) It is the responsibility of the board of a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO to—
(a) provide strategic direction;
(b) retain full and effective control;
(c) comply with laws and regulations;
(d)	 define	levels	of	materiality;
(e) identify and monitor key risks and key performance areas;
(f)	 identify	and	monitor	 non-financial	aspects;
4894
(g) explain the effect of all proposed resolutions to be passed 
at shareholder’s meetings;
(h) encourage shareholders to attend general meetings;
(i) have a board charter setting out its responsibilities which 
shall be published in the annual report and should, at least, 
make the board responsible for strategic plans, monitoring 
operational performance, monitoring performance of 
management, determining policies and procedures, risk 
management, internal controls, communications policy, 
director selection, induction of directors and evaluation of 
directors.
(j) determine a balance between governance constraints and 
entrepreneurial performance;
(k) review major plans of action;
(l) review and guide annual budget and business plans;
(m) oversee major capital expenditures, acquisitions and 
divestiture;
(n) ensure the integrity of the company’s accounting and 
financial	reporting	systems.	
16. Board committees.
 (1) Subject to subregulation (2) and the Companies Act, 2012, the 
board may establish committees to assist the board in the performance 
of its duties. 
 (2) All licensed insurers, reinsurers and HMOs shall have-
(a) an audit committee; 
(b) a risk management committee; 
(c) a remuneration committee; and 
(d) an investment committee. 
4895
 (3) An audit committee shall be composed of a chairperson and 
at least three other persons of reputable integrity not being members 
of the board.
 (4) Board committees, with the exception of operational 
committees, shall be chaired by independent directors.
 (5) The annual report shall state—
(a) the members of board committees;
(b) the number of meetings held;
(c) the attendance by directors. 
 (6) Chairpersons of board committees shall attend the annual 
general meetings.
17. Responsibilities of senior management 
 (1) The responsibilities of senior management of a licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO are—
(a) to carry out the day-to-day operations of the licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO in accordance with—
(i) its business objectives, corporate culture and risk 
appetite;
(ii) the strategies and policies established by the board; 
and
(iii)	 the	 long	term	and	financial	soundness	of	the	licensed	
insurer, reinsurer or HMO; 
(b)  to provide the board with recommendations for its review 
and approval on the strategy, business plans and policies 
of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO; 
(c) to provide the board with timely and accurate information, 
including	financial	information,	that	is	adequate	to	enable	
the	board	to	fulfil	its	responsibilities;	and
4896
(d) to maintain accurate and clear records of the internal 
organisation of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO.
 (2) Senior management shall ensure that it promotes a culture 
of sound risk management, compliance and the fair treatment of 
customers and potential customers.
18.	 Principal	officer
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall have at least 
one	principal	officer	who	shall	be	the	chief	executive	officer	and	a	full	
time employee.
	 (2)	 A	person	shall	not	be	appointed	a	principal	officer	unless—
(a)	 the	 person	satisfies	the	criteria	specified	in	Schedule	2	of	
the Act; 
(b)	 the	 person	has	the	qualification	and	experience	specified	in	
subregulation (3); and 
(c) the Authority has given its written approval for the 
appointment of that person under section 103(1) of the 
Act. 
	 (3)	 A	principal	officer	shall—
(a) possess a recognised university degree and a professional 
qualification	in	the	field	of	insurance;	and
(b)	 have	 at	least	eight	years’	working	experience	in	the	field	of	
insurance.
19.	 Chief	finance	officer
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall have at least 
one	chief	finance	officer	who	is	a	full-time	employee.
	 (2)	 A	 person	 shall	 not	 be	 appointed	 a	 chief	 finance	 officer	
unless—
4897
(a)	 the	 person	satisfies	the	criteria	specified	in	Schedule	2	of	
the Act; 
(b) the person—
(i)  possesses a recognised relevant university degree;
(ii)	 is	 a	 member	 of	 the	 Institute	 of	 Certified	 Public	
Accountants of Uganda;
(iii) has least four years’ working experience as an 
accountant; and 
(c) the Authority has given its written approval for the appointment 
of that person under section 103(1) of the Act.  
Part V— Control funCtIons and related matters
20. Control functions
 (1) The board of a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall 
ensure that a person in a control function—
(a) is not involved in the performance of services or activities 
which he or she is responsible for monitoring; 
(b) is not placed in a position where he or she is expected to 
undertake	duties	that	conflict	with	the	duties	of	the	control	
function; 
(c)	 is	 not	subjected	 to	 any	undue	influence	or	 pressure	 with	
respect to carrying out his or her duties;  
(d) has access to employees, service providers, customers 
and documents and information relating to the licensed 
business, in order perform his or her duties effectively;
(e)	 has	 sufficient	human	and	non-human	resources	to	perform	
the control function effectively. 
4898
 (2) The powers and responsibilities of each control function of a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO, and the key person in the control 
function shall be set out in writing. 
 (3) The board of a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall 
ensure that the performance of each control function is assessed at 
such intervals as the board considers appropriate.
 (4) Where a control function is to be undertaken in full or in 
part at a group level, the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall, 
on seeking approval for the appointment, provide the Authority with 
details of all fees, costs and charges to be paid by the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO in respect of the performance of the control function.
21. Combined control functions
 (1) Subject to subregulations (2) and (3), a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO may combine one or more control functions. 
 (2) An actuarial function and the internal audit function shall not 
be combined with each other or with any other control function. 
 (3) Control functions shall not be combined unless the board 
is	satisfied	that	the	combination	of	the	functions	shall	not	affect	the	
independence, objectivity or effectiveness of the functions.
22. Key person in control function
(1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall ensure that a 
key person in a control function appointed under section 61(3)(b) of 
the Act—
(a)	 satisfies	the	criteria	specified	in	Schedule	2	of	the	 Act;	
(b)	 has	 the	necessary	qualifications	and	experience	to	perform	
the control function;
(c) is approved by the Authority in accordance with section 
103(1) of the Act. 
4899
 (2) Where any control functions are combined in accordance 
with these Regulations, the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall 
appoint an individual to undertake the responsibilities of, or have 
overall responsibility for and oversight of, the combined control 
function and the individual appointed is regarded as the key person in 
each of the combined control functions. 
23. Key person in risk management function
 (1) The duties of a key person in the risk management function 
are—
(a) to assist the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO to identify, 
assess, monitor, manage and report on its key risks in a 
timely manner; and
(b) to promote and sustain a sound risk management culture 
within the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO.
 (2) A key person in the risk management function shall—
(a) possess a relevant degree and professional diploma in the 
field	of	risk	management	or	actuarial	science;	and
(b) have at least three years’ relevant working experience.
24. Underwriting and pricing strategy, policies, procedures and 
controls
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall develop 
and implement — 
(a) an underwriting and pricing strategy and policies; and
(b)	 procedures	 and	controls	that	are	sufficient	to	ensure	that	
the underwriting and pricing strategy and policies are 
effectively implemented. 
 (2) Underwriting and pricing strategies referred to in 
subregulation (1) may provide for—
(a) the evaluation of risks underwritten or to be underwritten;
4900
(b) the establishment of adequate premium levels, subject to 
any minimum premium rates prescribed by the Authority 
under section 64(2) of the Act; 
(c) the control of expenses related to premiums and claims;
(d)	 the	mitigation	and	diversification	of	risks	by—
(i)	 defining	limits	on	the	amount	of	risk	retained;	and	
(ii) in the case of a licensed insurer, providing for the 
transfer of appropriate levels of risk away from the 
licensed insurer through adequate and appropriate 
reinsurance arrangements. 
 (3) The underwriting and pricing strategy and policies shall be 
reviewed periodically.
 (4) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall develop 
measures to monitor the procedures and controls established in 
accordance with subregulation (1)(b).
25. Internal controls
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall develop 
and maintain adequate and effective internal controls appropriate for 
the nature, scale, complexity and diversity of its business and the 
risks to which it is exposed.
 (2) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall develop internal 
controls in such a manner as to ensure that—
(a) the business of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO is 
planned and conducted properly and in accordance with 
the strategies and policies of the licensed insurer, reinsurer 
or HMO; 
(b) the business of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO 
is operated in compliance with the Act and other laws of 
Uganda;
4901
(c) the assets of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO are 
appropriately safeguarded through measures designed to 
minimise the risk of loss from irregularities, error, fraud 
and physical damage, and to identify such occurrences 
promptly should they occur;
(d) the liabilities of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO are 
subject to appropriate controls;
(e) there are appropriate arrangements in place for the 
delegation of authority and responsibility and for the 
segregation of duties; 
(f) the accounting and other records of the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO are complete, accurate and timely and can 
be	used	to	compile	financial	statements	as	required	by	law;
(g) the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO is able to assess and 
monitor the adequacy of the capital resources, in relation 
to its business;
(h) the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO is able to identify 
and regularly assess all relevant risks in the conduct of 
its	business	so	that	the	identified	risks	can	be	measured,	
monitored and controlled appropriately and any losses can 
be monitored and controlled on a regular and timely basis;
(i) the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO is able to guard 
against	 involvement	 in	 financial	 crime	 and	 comply	 with	
anti–money	laundering	and	terrorist	financing	legislation;	
(j) adequate business resumption, disaster recovery and 
other contingency arrangements are in place and tested at 
appropriate intervals; and 
(k) adequate controls are in place in relation to information 
technology systems, including controls. 
 (3) The internal control policies shall require that any 
deficiencies	 identified	 in	the	internal	control	system	be	reported	in	a	
timely manner. 
4902
 (4) The internal controls shall operate at all levels of a licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO and shall apply to any outsourced functions. 
 (5) Where a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO also operates 
through branches or subsidiaries, its internal controls shall apply to 
those operations.
 (6) The internal controls of a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO 
shall provide for persons responsible for ensuring that adequate and 
effective internal controls are established and maintained.
26. Compliance function
 (1) The duties of a key person in a compliance function of a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO are—  
(a) to assist the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO to comply 
with the Act and other laws of Uganda; and 
(b) to promote and sustain a compliance culture.
 (2) A key person in a compliance function shall—
(a) maintain a register of compliance breaches containing 
information on the date, nature and extent of each 
compliance breach;
(b) ensure that employees are aware of the need for and the 
objectives of compliance and of their responsibilities 
under the compliance procedures manual;
(c) establish and maintain procedures to monitor and handle 
complaints. 
 (3) A key person in a compliance function shall—
(a) possess a bachelor’s degree in insurance, actuarial science, 
law,	banking	or	finance	or	relevant	discipline;	and
(b) at least three years working experience relating to 
compliance in any relevant area.
4903
27. Compliance procedures and controls
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall develop and 
maintain compliance procedures and controls that—
(a) are appropriate for the nature, scale, complexity and 
diversity of its business;
(b) ensure compliance—
(i) with its policies, the Act and other laws of Uganda;
(ii) by the board, senior management and employees 
with its policies; and
(iii) with its internal controls;
(c) are adequate to identify compliance breaches; and
(d) are effectively implemented.
 (2) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall, at least 
once every year, review the effectiveness of compliance procedures 
and controls in managing compliance risk.
28. Actuarial function
 (1) A key person in an actuarial function of a licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO shall be responsible for providing advice on—
(a) capital adequacy;
(b) technical provisions;
(c) premiums and pricing; 
(d) reinsurance; and
(e)	 compliance	 with	 the	 matters	 specified	 in	 paragraphs	 (a)	
to (d).
 (2) For purposes of subregulation (1), a key person in an 
actuarial function shall provide advice on—
4904
(a)	 actuarial	and	financial	risks;	
(b) investment policies and valuation of assets; 
(c) solvency position; 
(d) risk assessment and management policies and controls 
relevant	to	actuarial	matters	or	to	financial	condition;	
(e)	 distribution	 to	policyholders	and	beneficiaries	of	payments	
and	other	benefits	on	participating	policies;	
(f) underwriting of policies;
(g) design of reinsurance programmes; 
(h) product development and design; 
(i)	 the	 sufficiency	and	quality	of	data	used	in	the	calculation	
of technical provisions;
(j) risk modelling, where applicable;
(k)	 experience	reviews	and	profit	testing;	and
(l)	 distribution	 of	dividends	and	other	benefits	to	be	paid	to	
shareholders.
 (3) A key person in an actuarial function shall—
(a)	 possess	 a	 degree	 in	 actuarial	 science	 or	 a	 related	 field	
and—
(i)	 successfully	 completed	at	least	five	exams	leading	to	
a	full	actuarial	qualification;	or
(ii)	 possess	 a	 qualification	 equivalent	 to	 certified	
actuarial analyst awarded by an actuarial society 
or body recognised by the International Actuarial 
Association; or
(iii) a post graduate diploma in actuarial science;
4905
(b) have working experience in the insurance sector; and
(c) be a member of the Actuarial Association of Uganda. 
29. Internal audit function
 (1) A key person in the internal audit function shall provide a 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO with independent assurance of 
the	quality	of	financial	information	 and	statements	and	effectiveness 	
of the governance framework. 
 (2) For purposes of subregulation (1), a key person in the 
internal audit function shall— 
(a) assess whether the existing risk management strategy, 
policies,	procedures	and	controls	are	sufficient,	effective	
and appropriate for the business; 
(b) assess whether the risk management strategy, policies, 
procedures and controls, including internal controls, are 
being implemented and complied with;
(c) assess whether the procedures and controls for monitoring 
and assessing the on-going capital and solvency 
requirements are effective and are being implemented; 
(d) assess the reliability, integrity and completeness of the 
accounting,	financial	reporting,	management	information	
and information technology systems;
(e) review, periodically, the risk management function and the 
compliance function; and
(f) monitor the information systems. 
 (3) Subregulation (1) applies to all the activities of a licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO, including outsourced activities and 
activities carried out by branches or subsidiaries of the licensed 
insurer, reinsurer or HMO.
4906
 (4) The internal audit function shall be subject to independent 
review by the audit committee and the external auditor.
 (5) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall ensure that the 
internal audit function- 
(a) is independent from management and shall not be involved 
in the operation of the business of the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO; and
(b) report directly to the board, through the key person in the 
control function.  
 (6) A key person in the internal audit function shall be given 
the authority—
(a) to undertake, on the internal audit function’s initiative, a 
review of any department, unit or function;
(b) to require management to respond to any internal audit 
report, including on remediation or mitigation plans; and
(c) to carry out any task requested as long as it is not inconsistent 
with the functions of the internal audit function. 
 (7) A key person in the internal audit function shall—
(a)	 possess	a	bachelor’s	degree	in	the	relevant	field;
(b)	 be	 a	member	of	the	Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accountants	
of Uganda; and
(c) have at least three years’ relevant working experience.
30. Internal audit reports to be submitted to Authority
Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall—
(a) within twenty-one days after the last day of each calendar 
quarter, provide the Authority with a list of reports that 
have been prepared by the person in the internal audit 
4907
function during that calendar quarter, with a summary of 
the areas covered by each report; or
(b) on the written request of the Authority, submit to the 
Authority	copies	of	the	internal	audit	reports	specified	in	
the	Authority’s	request,	within	the	time	period	specified	in	
the request.
31. Whistleblowing policy
Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall establish, maintain 
and implement an effective whistleblowing policy.  
32. Responsibility for outsourced activities
 (1) Where a licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO outsources an 
activity, the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO —
(a) shall oversee the performance of the activity by the service 
provider; and
(b) remains responsible for the performance of the activity by 
the service provider. 
 (2) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall not outsource— 
(a) any duties of the compliance function;
(b) any activity if the outsourcing of that activity would—
(i) impair the Authority’s ability to supervise the 
licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO; or
(ii) affect the rights of a customer or potential customer 
against the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO.  
 (3) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall not, without the 
prior written approval of the Authority, outsource any of the duties 
of the risk management function, the internal audit function or the 
actuarial function.
4908
33. Requirements for outsourcing of activities
A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall not enter into an outsourcing 
arrangement in relation to any activity unless the licensed insurer, 
reinsurer or HMO —
(a) has undertaken an assessment of the outsourcing 
arrangement regarding—
(i) the reasonableness of the charges, fees and costs to 
be paid under the outsourcing contract taking into 
account the activities to be undertaken by the service 
provider;
(ii) the capacity and ability of the service provider to 
undertake the outsourced activity; 
(iii) the risks associated with outsourcing the proposed 
activity to a   service provider
(b)	 is	 satisfied	 that	 the	 outsourcing	 will	 be	 subject	 to	
appropriate controls; 
(c) obtains the approval of the Authority to outsource the activity. 
34. Outsourcing policy
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall have an 
outsourcing policy which shall be kept up-to-date.
 (2) For the purposes of subregulation (1), an outsourcing policy 
shall— 
(a) specify activities appropriate for outsourcing; 
(b) set out procedures and controls to manage outsourcing risk;
(c) set out the internal review and approvals required for 
outsourcing; and
(d) specify the criteria for making outsourcing decisions. 
4909
 (3)  A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO shall ensure that 
its outsourcing arrangements are operated in accordance with the 
outsourcing policy.
35. Outsourcing to be governed by written agreement
 (1) The outsourcing of any activity shall be governed by a 
service level agreement with the service provider which— 
(a)	 clearly	 specifies	 all	 material	 aspects	 of	 the	 outsourcing,	
including— 
(i) the duration of the agreement;
(ii) the activities to be outsourced;
(iii) the rights and responsibilities of the parties; 
(iv)	 the	 protection	by	the	service	provider	of	confidential	
information; 
(v) provisions for monitoring and assessing the 
outsourcing; 
(vi) provisions for the termination of the agreement; 
(vii) an agreed mechanism for resolving disputes; 
(viii) access to all documents and information relevant to 
the outsourced activity; and
(b) provides that the governing law of the outsourcing 
agreement is the law of Uganda.  
 (2) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall develop and 
maintain a contingency plan for each outsourcing agreement entered into.
36. Costs of supervision of outsourced activities outside Uganda
Where the Authority, under section 115(2)(b) of the Act, inspects the 
business or the premises of a service provider to whom a licensed 
4910
insurer, reinsurer or HMO has outsourced activities and the business 
or premises of the service provider are situated outside Uganda, the 
Authority may require the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO to pay 
its reasonable costs of undertaking the inspection.   
37. Business continuity plan
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall develop 
and maintain a business continuity plan which shall make provision 
for the continued operations of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or 
HMO in the event of unforeseen interruptions or disruptions.  
 (2) A business continuity plan shall be— 
(a) appropriate for the nature, scale, complexity and diversity 
of	 the	 business	 and	 risk	 profile	 of	 a	 licensed	 insurer,	
reinsurer or HMO; and
(b) regularly reviewed, tested and updated.
 (3) Without limiting the general effect of subregulation (1), 
a business continuity plan shall provide for mechanisms to enable 
the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO —
(a) to carry on its insurance business and to comply with the 
Act;
(b) to minimise losses to functions, systems or data and 
recover losses in a timely manner; and 
(c) to resume business in a timely manner, where the severity 
of the interruption or disruption results in the ceasing of 
licensed insurance business or any part of it.  
 (4) For purposes of subregulation (1), the unforeseen 
interruptions and disruptions include—
(a) the loss or failure of internal or external resources including 
human resources, systems and other assets;
4911
(b) the loss or corruption of data or other information; and
(c) external events such as criminal acts, weather events and 
other natural disasters.
38. Remuneration policy 
 (1) Every licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO shall develop 
and implement a remuneration policy. 
 (2) The remuneration policy of a licensed insurer, reinsurer or 
HMO shall—
(a) take full account of—
(i) its business objectives and corporate culture, strategy 
and risk appetite; and
(ii)	 its	long	term	interests 	and	financial	soundness;
(b) cover the remuneration of directors, senior management, 
key persons in control functions and any other employees. 
(c) not provide incentives that are likely to induce imprudent, 
unnecessary, inappropriate or excessive risk-taking; 
(d) not provide incentives that are likely to result in the unfair 
treatment of customers or potential customers. 
 (3) Where a control function is outsourced, the remuneration 
payable to the service provider shall be consistent with remuneration 
policy of the licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO. 
39. Additional strategies, policies, procedures and controls
The Authority may –
(a) require a licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO to develop 
and maintain any other strategies, policies, procedures or 
controls as are appropriate taking into consideration the 
nature, scale, complexity and diversity of the licensed 
4912
business and the degree of risk associated with the 
business; and
(b) ensure that the strategies, policies, procedures or controls 
established in accordance with paragraph (a) are fully 
and clearly documented and communicated to relevant 
persons. 
40. Risk management strategy
 (1) The risk management strategy and policy of a licensed 
insurer, reinsurer and HMO required to be established by section 62 of 
the Act shall—
(a) set the level of risk that a licensed insurer, reinsurer and 
HMO is prepared to accept for each type of risk;
(b) be reviewed periodically;
(c) be fully and clearly documented and effectively 
communicated and readily available to the directors, 
relevant members of senior management, employees 
and service providers, who have responsibility for 
implementing the policy; and 
(d) specify risks covered by the policy including –
(i)	 the	risks	specified	in	section	62(2)(d)	of	the	 Act;
(ii) legal risk;
(iii) conduct of business risk; 
(iv) contagion risk;
(v) related party risk;
(vi) pricing and product design risk; 
(vii) reinsurance risk; 
(viii) outsourcing risk; 
4913
(ix) foreign exchange risk; and
(x) cyber risk. 
 (2) A licensed insurer, reinsurer or HMO may make provision in 
its risk management strategy for additional risks which are reasonably 
foreseeable	 and	 not	 specified	 in	 subregulation	 (1)	 after	 taking	 into	
consideration the nature, scale, complexity and diversity of its business. 
41. Group strategies, policies, procedures and controls 
A licensed insurer, reinsurer and HMO which is part of a group of 
companies shall, in addition, to the strategies, policies, procedures and 
controls required to be established by the Act or these Regulations, 
submit the strategies, policies, procedures and controls of the group 
companies.
Part VI— ConduCt of InsuranCe BusIness
42. Application of this Part
This Part applies only to licensed insurers and HMOs. 
43. Objectives of this Part
The objective of this Part is to ensure that licensed insurers and 
HMOs —
(a) conduct business with integrity and with due skill, care 
and diligence;
(b) observe good conduct of business standards and practices 
and be transparent in business arrangements;
(c) have due regard for the interests and needs of customers;
(d) treat customers and potential customers fairly;
(e)	 manage	conflict	of	interest	fairly;	
(f) pay due regard to the information needs of customers and 
potential customers;
4914
(g) take reasonable steps to ensure that information 
communicated to customers and potential customers is 
clear, fair, accurate and not misleading; and
(h) ensure that customer information is adequately protected 
and used appropriately.
44. Business conduct policies, procedures and controls
 (1) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall develop and implement 
business conduct policies, procedures and controls for the purpose of 
complying with these Regulations.
 (2) Without prejudice to subregulation (1), business conduct 
policies, procedures and controls shall –
(a) take account of the circumstances of different customers 
and potential customers;
(b) make provision for the development, marketing and sale 
of insurance products;
(c) provide for the giving of clear information to customers 
and potential customers at the point of sale and before and 
after an insurance contract is entered into;
(d) provide measures to minimise the sale of insurance 
products that are inappropriate for customers;
(e) provide measures aimed at ensuring that insurance advice 
given to customers and potential customers is of high 
quality;
(f) make provision for procedures to deal with customer 
claims, complaints and disputes in a fair and timely 
manner;
(g) provide for the protection and appropriate use of customer 
information; and
(h) provide for the management of the reasonable expectations 
of customers.
4915
45. Requirements relating to the development of insurance 
products
Every licensed insurer and HMO shall, when designing and developing 
insurance products—
(a) take account of any product development criteria issued 
by the Authority; and
(b) have regard to the interests of different types of customers 
and potential customers. 
46. Approval by Authority of text or format of policy of insurance 
product 
 (1) No licensed insurer or HMO shall issue a text or format of a 
policy or a proposal form unless the text or format of the policy or the 
proposal form has been approved by the Authority in accordance with 
section 65 of the Act. 
 (2) Where a licensed insurer or HMO contravenes this regulation, 
the Authority shall issue a written directive to the licensed insurer 
or HMO to comply or take such action as may be required by the 
Authority.
 (3) Where a licensed insurer or HMO fails to comply with a 
written directive issued by the Authority under subregulation (2), 
the licensed insurer or HMO shall be subject to the penalty set out in 
section 121(2) of the Act
47. Application for approval of text or format of policy of 
insurance product
 (1) An application for the approval of a text or format of a policy 
or a proposal form shall be in Form 3 in Schedule 2. 
 (2) Where an application is in respect to a bundled insurance 
product, the application in subregulation (1) shall be made by the 
licensed insurer or HMO that will take the larger percentage of 
the risk.
4916
 (3) The application shall be accompanied by the documents 
specified	 in	 Form	 3	 in	 Schedule	 2	 or	 such	 other	 information	 and	
documentation as the Authority may require. 
 (4) Upon receipt of an application, the Authority shall review the 
application to ensure that all the relevant documents are available to 
enable the processing of the application.
	 (5)	 The	 Authority	 may,	 before	 making	 a	 final	 determination	
on the application, require the licensed insurer or HMO to provide 
additional information and documentation including reports from 
actuaries and other specialists. 
 (6) After considering the application, the Authority may approve 
the text or format of the policy or the proposal form with or without 
conditions. 
 (7) The decision to approve the text or format of the policy or the 
proposal	form	shall	be	made	within	forty-five	days	after	receipt	of	the	
complete application. 
 (8) Where the Authority approves the text or format of the policy 
or	the	proposal	form,	the	Authority	shall	issue	an	approval	certificate	
in Form 4 in Schedule 2. 
 (9) Where the Authority refuses to approve the text or format of 
the policy or the proposal form, the decision shall include the reasons 
for the refusal.
 (10) Where the Authority does not approve or reject the text or 
format of a policy or proposal form, or an amendment in the text or 
format	within	forty	five	days,	the	licensed	insurer	or	HMO	shall	treat	
the text or format of the policy or the proposal form or amendment as 
approved.  
48. Variation, suspension, and revocation of approval of text or 
format of policy of insurance product
 (1) The Authority may vary, suspend or revoke an approval 
where— 
4917
(a)	 the	 approval	no	longer	satisfies	the	design	criteria	specified	
in these Regulations; 
(b) the text or format of a policy or proposal form no longer 
meets	the	requirements	specified	in	these	Regulations;
(c) the licensed insurer or HMO is marketing or selling the 
insurance product contrary to any requirements of the Act; 
or
(d) the policy is unfair to policyholders or prospective 
policyholders or any class of policyholders or prospective 
policyholders. 
 (2) The Authority shall, before varying, suspending or revoking 
an approval, give the licensed insurer or HMO a right to be heard. 
 (3) Where the Authority varies, suspends or revokes approval, 
the Authority shall give reasons in writing for the variation, suspension 
or revocation.
 (4) Where the Authority varies, suspends or revokes approval, 
the licensed insurer or HMO concerned shall cease to market or sell 
the policy with effect from the date on which it receives the notice of 
suspension or revocation. 
 (5) The variation, suspension or revocation of approval does not 
affect—
(a) the legal status of the contract; or
(b) the rights of any policyholder who purchased, or acquired 
rights under, the insurance contract, prior to the date when 
the variation, suspension or revocation takes effect.
49. Cancellation of insurance contracts during cooling-off 
period
 (1) Subject to subregulation (2), every insurance contract shall 
provide the policyholder with a right to cancel the contract without 
4918
giving any reason and without the payment of any fee or penalty 
within 30 days—
(a) after the date the contract is entered into; or
(b) after the date on which the policyholder receives the policy.
 (2) Subregulation (1) does not apply— 
(a)	 where	 the	policyholder	or	a	beneficiary	has	made	a	claim	
under the contract; 
(b) to an index insurance contract.
 (3) An insurance contract shall specify the procedures for effecting 
cancellation	within	the	thirty-day	period	specified	in	subregulation	(1)	
and where the policyholder complies with those procedures—
(a) the contract is terminated; and
(b) the amount required to be paid by the policyholder shall be 
no more than the cost of the insurance cover provided, on 
a strictly proportionate basis, for the period.
 (4) Where a customer exercises his or her right to cancel an 
insurance contract under this regulation, the licensed insurer or HMO 
shall repay the balance of the premium paid by the customer. 
50. Requirements relating to marketing of insurance products
A licensed insurer or HMO shall—
(a) take into account the interests of different types of 
customers and potential customers when marketing an 
insurance product;
(b) take reasonable steps to ensure that its products are 
promoted to customers and potential customers in a way 
that—
 (i) is clear and fair and that is not inaccurate or 
misleading; and 
4919
 (ii) takes account of the knowledge and experience 
of an ordinary customer for the insurance product 
being marketed; 
(c) take reasonable steps to ensure that—
(i)  a customer or potential customer knows whether or 
not advice is being provided;
 (ii) any advice that the licensed insurer or HMO provides 
to a customer or potential customer is appropriate, 
taking into account the circumstances disclosed to it 
by that person; and
 (iii) a person only purchases an insurance product if 
the	 person	 is	 eligible	 to	 obtain	 benefits	 under	 the	
product; 
(d) provide relevant information to its sales staff and any 
insurance intermediaries through which it distributes the 
products, so as to ensure that they understand the target 
market and the characteristics of the product; and
(e) monitor the performance of the product, and its 
distribution, after marketing has commenced, including 
in relation to—
(i) its suitability for the consumers for whom it was 
developed and to whom it is marketed;
(ii) whether the product is continuing to deliver the 
expected	benefits;
(iii) whether the proposed distribution channels are 
appropriate for the product; and
(iii) compliance with paragraphs (b), (c) and (d).
4920
51. Key features statement
 (1) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall prepare a statement 
containing key features of every insurance product that it markets or 
sells. 
 (2) The statement referred to in subregulation (1) shall—
(a) be written in simple language; and 
(b) contain a summary of the cover provided by, and the key 
features of, the insurance product including-
(i)  the name of the licensed insurer or HMO and the 
address	of	its	principal	office	in	Uganda;
(ii)  the type of insurance product; 
(iii) a description of the risks insured by the contract and 
any	significant	or	unusual	exclusions	or	limitations;
(iv) the duration of the policy, stating whether it is a non-
life or a life policy;
(v)	 	 the	policy	benefits;
 (vi) the details of the policyholder’s cancellation rights;
 (vii) the consequences for early termination by the 
policyholder;
 (viii) the contact details for notifying a claim under the 
policy and a brief summary of the claims procedure;
 (ix) the obligations on a prospective customer to disclose 
material facts;
 (x) where appropriate, a statement that the policyholder 
may need to review and update the cover periodically 
to ensure that it remains adequate;
4921
 (xi) the right to complain and the method of lodging a 
complaint; 
 (xii) a statement that the key features statement does 
not contain the full terms of the insurance product, 
which are to be found in the policy document; and
 (xiii) in the case of an insurance product with an investment 
component, specify the customer’s commitments and 
all	charges	and	benefits	associated	with	the	product.	
 (3) The statement shall be signed by the prospective policy 
holder at the point of sale and before inception of the policy. 
 (4) A statement may contain information concerning the premium 
payable under the insurance product. 
 (5) A statement shall not contain any information other than the 
information	specified	in	this	regulation.
 (6) A licensed insurer or HMO shall provide the customer or 
prospective	 customer	 with	 the	 statement	 in	 sufficient	 time	 for	 the	
customer or prospective customer to make an informed decision about 
whether to enter into, or renew, the insurance contract.
 (7) Where a statement does not contain details of the premium 
payable, the licensed insurer or HMO shall provide the details of the 
premium payable including the date when the premium is required to 
be paid and the consequences of non–payment of the premium. 
52. Promotional material
 (1) Any promotional material used by a licensed insurer or HMO 
to sell or market an insurance product shall—
(a) state the underwriter of the product;
(b)	 state	 prominently	 the	 basis	 for	 any	 claimed	 benefits	 and	
limitations; 
4922
(c) state the coverage provided by the product; and
(d) not contain false, misleading, inaccurate, unclear, unfair or 
misleading statements. 
 (2) The promotional material referred to in subregulation (1) 
shall be easily understandable by those persons to whom the product 
or the promotional material is targeted.
53. Policy to be given to policyholder
A prospective policy holder shall on payment of the premium be issued 
with an insurance policy by the licensed insurer or HMO.
54. Policy servicing requirements
 (1) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall— 
(a) service insurance products sold appropriately throughout 
until the point at which all its obligations under the 
insurance	product	have	been	satisfied;
(b) during the period in which an insurance product is in force, 
disclose to the policyholder information on— 
(i) any contractual changes to an insurance product; 
and
(ii) any relevant changes to the licensed insurer or HMO.
 (2) Where a licensed insurer discloses contractual changes to an 
insurance product , the licensed insurer shall also notify the policyholder 
of his or her rights and obligations in relation to the change.
55. Insurance claims handling
 (1) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall—
(a) handle claims promptly, fairly and in a transparent manner;
(b) provide reasonable guidance to help a customer make a 
claim;
4923
(c) provide a customer with information concerning the status 
of the claim on an ongoing basis;
(d) not reject a claim unreasonably including by terminating 
or avoiding a policy; and where a claim is rejected, provide 
information relating to the rejection or partial rejection of 
the claim; 
(e) settle claims promptly once settlement terms are agreed; 
and
(f) maintain a claims register in which the details of every 
insurance claim made are recorded.
 (2) Without limiting subregulation (1), a licensed insurer and 
HMO shall develop and publish service level standards covering the 
claims handling process.
56. Complaints policy and procedures
Every licensed insurer and HMO shall —
(a) develop and maintain a complaints policy and procedures 
which provide for the effective consideration and proper 
handling of any complaints made to it and for appropriate 
remedial action to be taken, where appropriate; and
(b) maintain a complaints register in which shall be recorded 
any complaints received together with details of how the 
complaint has been, or is being, dealt with.
57.	 Notification	of	appointment	of	insurance	agents
 (1) Where a licensed insurer or HMO appoints an insurance agent, 
the licensed insurer or HMO shall, in writing, notify the Authority of 
the appointment. 
	 (2)	 The	 notification	 referred	 to	 in	 subregulation	 (1)	 shall	 be	
accompanied by a copy of the instrument appointing the agent. 
4924
 (3) A licensed insurer and HMO to whom subregulation (1) 
applies shall keep a register of all its insurance agents. 
58. Training obligations 
 (1) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall provide appropriate 
training to any insurance agent appointed to act in relation to the 
distribution of its insurance products.
 (2) The training provided in accordance with subregulation (1) 
shall include appropriate and relevant training relating— 
(a) to the duties and responsibilities of the agent in relation to 
the distribution of insurance products;
(b)	 to	 the	 specific	 insurance	 products	 that	 the	 agent	 will	 be	
authorised to distribute;
(c) to consumer protection and the fair treatment of customers 
and potential customers; 
 (3) The training referred to in subregulation (1) shall be provided 
to an agent as soon as practicable after the appointment of the agent, 
and on a regular basis. 
Part VII— general
59. Group insurance policy
 (1) A group insurance policy shall state the insurable interest of 
the master policyholder.
 (2) The terms of a group insurance policy shall require the master 
policyholder	to	maintain	a	register	of	beneficiaries	under	the	product  
which shall—
(a)	 adequately	identify	each	beneficiary;
(b)	 state	 the	date	upon	which	the	person	became	a	beneficiary;
4925
(c)	 state	 the	date	on	which	the	beneficiary	was	provided	with	
a copy of the statement containing key features of the 
policy;
(d) provide details of any other persons who are entitled 
to	 benefits	 under	 the	 contract	 by	 virtue	 of	 the	 person	
becoming	a	beneficiary;	and
(e)	 summarise	 the	 cover	 provided	 to	 the	 beneficiary	 by	 the	
policy;
(f)	 provide	 each	person	who	becomes	a	beneficiary	under	a	
group insurance policy with— 
(i) a schedule setting out the details of the cover 
provided	to	the	beneficiary,	where	applicable;	
(ii) the name and contact details of an employee 
or representative of the policyholder whom the 
beneficiary	may	contact	for	further	information	in	
relation to the policy;
(iii)	 details	 as	to	how	the	beneficiary	may	access	a	copy	
of the policy document.
 (3) Every licensed insurer and HMO shall take reasonable steps 
to ensure that the master policyholder complies with the obligations 
specified	in	sub	regulation	(2).	
60. Bundled insurance products
 (1) Where a licensed insurer or HMO proposes to offer a bundled 
insurance product, the licensed insurer or HMO shall enter into a 
written agreement which shall—
(a) state the lead licensed insurer or HMO and the 
responsibilities of the lead licensed insurer or HMO;
(b) the basis on which premiums and responsibility for claims 
will be allocated; 
4926
(c) any commission, charges or other consideration to be paid 
to the lead licensed insurer or HMO.
(2) The responsibilities of the lead licensed insurer or HMO 
shall include— 
(a) the receipt of all premiums payable under the product and 
the payment of the agreed allocation of the premium to the 
other licensed insurer or HMO;
(b) the receipt, management, settlement and payment of 
claims made under the product.  
61. Electronic communications
 (1) A licensed insurer or HMO may communicate with, and 
provide documents to, an insured person by electronic means but 
only if the insured person has given his or her consent to the use of 
electronic communication. 
 (2) For the purposes of subregulation (1), consent may be given 
by an insured person through a SMS message or any other type of 
electronic communication or by signifying consent through the use of 
an application or program.
62. Revocation of SI.66 of 2002
The Insurance Regulations, 2002, S.I. 66 of 2002 is revoked. 
4927
Regulation 8(1), (2)
SCHEDULE 1
Categories and Classes of Insurance Business
Part I — lIfe InsuranCe BusIness
Class 
No. Class Name Description Subclasses (if any)
1. Annuity business Contracts to pay annuities on 
human life that guarantee a 
fixed	or	variable	payment	to	the	
annuitant at some future time 
(but excluding any contract 
falling within Class 3).
(a) Annuity certain
(b) Temporary annuity
(c) Guaranteed annuity
(d) Capital protected annuity
2. Ordinary Life 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance 
on human life, including 
contracts	 that	 pay	 a	 benefit	 to	
a	 beneficiary	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	
policy term or if the insured 
dies (but excluding any contract 
falling within Class 3).
(a) Term life assurance
(b) Whole life assurance
(c) Endowments
(d) Income protection
3 Group Life & 
Superannuation 
policies
Contracts to pay Lump Sums to 
employees/ former- employees, 
creditors or other individuals 
that relate to the issuing of or 
the undertaking of liability 
under superannuation, Group 
term or Group Credit policies.
(a) Group Life
(b) Group Term
(c) Group Credit
(d) Guaranteed investment 
Funds
4. Investment-linked 
life insurance
Contracts to pay annuities or 
contracts of insurance on hu -
man life under which the ben -
efits	are	wholly or partly to be 
determined by references to the 
value of, or the income from, 
property of any description 
(whether	or	not	specified	in	the	
contracts) or by reference to 
fluctuations	 in,	 or	 in	 an	 index	
of, the value of property of any 
description (whether or not so 
specified).
(a) Pure endowments
(b) Unit-linked and linked 
investment contracts
(c) Non-linked investments
  
4928
5. Permanent Health 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance 
providing	 specified	 benefits	
against risks of persons 
becoming incapacitated as 
a result of sustaining injury 
through an accident or of 
sickness	or	infirmity,	including 
critical illness and long-term 
care insurance.
6. Other Life 
Insurance 
Contracts of insurance, not 
included in classes 1 to 5 that the 
Authority determines constitute 
life insurance business.
Part II — non-lIfe InsuranCe BusIness
Class 
No.
Class Name Brief Description of Class Sub–Classes (if any)
7. Fire insurance Contracts of insurance against 
loss or damage to property, and 
consequential losses, due to 
fire,	explosion,	storm	and	other	
natural perils and other perils 
customarily	 included	 in	 fire	
insurance policies.
Excluding insurance of a type 
described above which is 
incidental to some other class of 
insurance business. 
(a) Fire insurance 
domestic (including 
house owners and 
householders)
(b) Fire insurance 
industrial and 
commercial
8. Theft insurance Contracts of insurance against 
loss or damage to property due 
to theft or any other cause not 
covered under any other class, 
including consequential losses.
(a) Burglary, all risks 
and other theft insur-
ance
(b) Fidelity guarantee
4929
9. Personal Ac-
cident, Health 
and Medical 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance that pro -
vide	 fixed	 pecuniary	 benefits	
or	 benefits	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 an	
indemnity (or a combination of 
both) against risks of the person 
insured—
(a) sustaining accidental in -
jury,
(b) dying as a result of an ac-
cident,
(c) becoming incapacitated 
as a result of disease,
(d) attributable to sickness or 
infirmity,
Contracts of insurance that pro -
vide cover against medical ex -
penses. 
This class excludes any contract 
of insurance that falls within a 
class of life insurance business.
(a) Personal accident 
insurance 
(b) Health/medical 
expenses insurance 
(where separate poli-
cies are issued)
10. Employer’s Lia-
bility Insurance
Contracts of insurance against 
the liability of an employer to 
the employer’s employees in 
relation to any injury or disease 
arising out of, or in the course 
of, their employment. 
11. Liability Insur-
ance 
Contracts of insurance against 
risks of the persons insured in -
curring liability to third parties 
(excluding any risk to which 
any other class of non-life insur-
ance relates).   
(a) Public liability
(b) Professional indemnity
(c) Product liability
(d) Liability insurance, 
others
4930
12. Marine Insur-
ance
Contracts of insurance against—
(a) loss of or damage to 
marine craft or the 
equipment	 or	 fittings	 of	
marine craft;
 (b) loss or damage arising 
out of or in connection 
with the freight, use, 
construction or repair of 
marine craft, including 
third party risks, carrier’s 
liability and medical 
expenses for the injury 
of occupants of a marine 
craft, including crew.
(a) Marine hull
(b) Marine cargo
13. Aviation Insur-
ance
Contracts of insurance against—
(a) loss of or damage to 
aircraft or aircraft 
equipment	or	fittings;
(b) loss or damage arising 
out of or in connection 
with the use of aircraft, or 
the construction or repair 
of aircraft, including 
third party risks, carrier’s 
liability, airport owner’s 
liability and medical 
expenses for the injury or 
loss of life of occupants 
of an aircraft, including 
aircrew.
14. Motor Insurance Contracts of insurance against—
(a) loss of or damage to 
motor vehicles; 
(b) loss or damage arising 
out of or in connection 
with the use of, motor 
vehicles, including third 
party risks, carrier’s 
liability and medical 
expenses for the injury 
of occupants of a motor 
vehicle.
4931
15. Agricultural 
Insurance 
(including 
horticultural 
and	fisheries	
insurance)
Contracts of insurance against— 
(a) loss of or damage to ag -
ricultural produce, live -
stock, agricultural stocks 
and consumables and 
buildings, temporary 
structures, plant, machin -
ery and vehicles used in 
connection with agricul -
ture;
 (b) loss or damage arising 
out of or in connection 
with the use or operation 
of buildings, temporary 
structures, plant, machin-
ery and vehicles used in 
connection with agricul -
ture, including loss of or 
damage to surrounding 
property of the insured, 
liability to third parties 
for damage to property, 
injury or loss of life;
(c) loss or damage arising 
out of contract work in 
relation to buildings, tem-
porary structures, plant, 
machinery and vehicles 
used in connection with 
agriculture, including 
damage to property on 
site and third party risks.
For the purposes of this class—
(i) agriculture includes 
horticulture and 
fisheries;	and
(ii) livestock includes 
poultry,	 fish,	 bees	
and working 
animals.
4932
16. Financial Loss 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance against 
the	 risk	 of	 financial	 and	 other	
losses to the person insured—
(a) arising from the failure of 
debtors to pay their debts 
when due, whether by 
reason of their insolvency 
or otherwise (credit 
insurance);
(b) arising from the person 
insured having to perform 
contracts of guarantee 
entered by them, 
including performance 
bonds,	 fidelity	 bonds,	
administration bonds and 
other similar contracts of 
guarantee (suretyship);
(c) attributable to the person 
insured incurring legal 
expenses, including the 
cost of litigation (legal 
expenses insurance);
(d) attributable to the person 
insured incurring other 
unforeseen expenses 
(not falling within any 
other class of non-life 
insurance), including 
fidelity	 and	 kidnap	
and ransom insurance 
(miscellaneous	 financial	
loss insurance).
4933
17. Engineering 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance against—
(a) loss or damage to plant 
and machinery;
(b) loss or damage arising 
out of the use or operation 
of plant and machinery, 
including loss of or 
damage to surrounding 
property of the insured, 
liability to third parties 
for damage to property, 
injury or loss of life;
(c) loss or damage arising 
out of contract work 
in relation to plant and 
machinery, including 
damage to property on 
site and third party risks. 
(a) Contractor’s all risks
(b) Engineering 
insurance, others
18. Goods in Transit Contracts of insurance 
against loss of or damage to 
merchandise, baggage and 
all other goods in transit, 
irrespective of the form of 
transport.
19. Other Non-life 
Insurance
Contracts of insurance, not 
included in classes 6 to 18 
that the Authority determines 
constitute non-life insurance 
business.
4934
Regulation 9(2)
SCHEDULE 2 
Form 1 
Application for Licensed Insurer / Reinsurer/HMO Licence1
 1. Name of applicant: …………………………..…………………………
 2. Postal	address	(Head	Office):	……………………………………….
3. Telephone Nos.………………………………………….......…………….
4. E-Mail: ………………............................…..............………………………..
Website: …………………………........................……………………......…
5. Physical	address:	(Head	Office)….…………………….........………………
6. No.	of	Branch/Agency	Offices	………………………………........…………
7. Date of Incorporation ………………………………………….......………..
8. Proposed date for Commencement of business.………….……........………
9. Bankers:
Name
Address
Location, Postal Address, Email, etc.
10. Note: Please give details of commitment with the bank.
11. Total number of all classes of employees ………………… 
Managerial…………. 
Officers	…………………….	
Support Staff ……………….. (give details)
12. Insurance Agents ……………………………… (Total Number)
13. Name and address of reinsures/retrocessionaires and their current ratings.
………………………………
14. Share Capital -
1 Choose whichever is applicable
4935
15. (a) Authorised share capital: ………………………............…………….
(b) Paid up share capital: ………………………………………………....
(c) Net worth/Shareholders funds. ………………………...……………..
(d) Composition of paid up capital and insurance funds…….....…………
16. Deposits made under section 38 of the Act: …………………………….....
17. Insurance business intended to be transacted: state whether life or non-life or
Health Membership Organisations………....................................................
18. Please	 fill	 in	 the	 personal	 questionnaire	 form	 which	 is	 downloaded	 from	
our website on www.ira.go.ug	 (for	 each	 of	 the	 Directors,	 Senior	 Officer	
and	Principal	Officer)	and	Significant	Shareholders	to	be	filled	at	least	once	
every three years.
19. (a) Has	any	member	of	Staff	in	the	past	five	years	been	convicted	of	any	
offence involving fraud or dishonesty?    …………….....................
(b) If yes give full details on a separate paper.
20. (a)
(b)
Has any member of staff been adjudged to be bankrupt or com-
pounded with Creditors?…..
If yes give full details on a separate paper.
21. (a) Has any member of staff been involved in the management of any 
insurance	institution	or	financial	institution	which	has	been	wound	
up	in	the	last	five	years?………………………….
(b) If yes give full details on a separate paper.
22. Indicate the nature of interest (if any) of any member of staff in any 
institution licensed under the Act.
(i) Date of last valuation ………………….…………………
(ii) Date of submission of the valuation report …………........
Annual Accounts
(i) Date of submission of accounts to IRA……………………..
(ii) Date of last annual meeting of shareholders…………….....
(iii) Date of submission of minutes of the above meeting to the IRA
(iv) Date of when accounts were published (indicate the news -
papers) …………................................................................
23. List all brokers who you intend to place business with……..…………….....
24. List	and	attach	information	on	contracts	with	affiliates	(see	Appendix	..…..)
25. List and attaché information on contracts with any outsourcing arrangements
4936
26. I, the undersigned, (name) ………………………………………………...
being	the	Chief	Executive	Officer	confirm	that	I	have	carefully	studied	all	
the information hereinabove and hereby certify that the information con -
tained herein and documents submitted are true and accurate to the best of 
my knowledge and belief.
Name ……………………….
Signature …………………..
Date …………………………
ENCLOSURES TO THE APPLICATION FORM
1.	 	Certified	copy	of	the	applicant	constitutes	documents	and	certificate	of	
incorporation, or other document by which the applicant is constituted.
2. If the applicant is associated with other companies or entities, an 
organogram showing the relationship with the associated companies 
and entities, together with any parallel companies; the position of 
each associated company and the relationship between the associated 
companies or entities; the shareholdings held by each of the associated 
companies or entities and a general description of the activities of each 
of the associated companies or entities.
3. Written consent to act for the person appointed, or proposed to be appointed, 
as the applicant’s auditor; and if applicable, the person appointed, or 
proposed to be appointed, as the applicant’s appointed actuary.
4.	 A 	business	plan	signed	by	the	Chief	Executive	Officer	and	the	Chair	
of the board that complies with the Schedule and any Guidance issued 
by the Authority.
5.	 The	 most	 recent	 audited	 financial	 statements	 of	 the	 applicant,	 the	
applicant’s	 holding	 company	 and	 consolidated	 group	 financial	
statements, if any.
6. Details of the reinsurance arrangements proposed by the applicant or, 
in the case of a relicensed insurer, proposed retrocession arrangements 
(To be submitted annually for Non-life Companies); and
7. Evidence that the security deposit required by section 38 of the Act 
has been placed with a commercial bank.
4937
Regulation 11
Form 2
Licence to transact insurance business
The Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda pursuant to its Authority 
under Section 35 of the Insurance Act 2017, hereby grants this licence to
Company Name:  ……………………………………………...........
Address:  ……………………………………………………..……
Category of Licence: .…………………………………………………………
Date of Issue:  ………………………………………………........
This licence is subject to the provisions of the Insurance Act, 2017 the 
Regulations thereunder and the Conditions hereby given and shall remain 
valid from the date of issue unless varied, suspended or revoked. 
CONDITIONS
1……………………………………………………………………………
2……………………………………………………………………………
3……………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………. 
Chief	Executive	Officer
4938
Regulation 47(1), (3)
Form 3
Application for approval of text or format of the policy or the proposal 
form for insurance product
1. Company Name
2. Product Name
Licensed insurer policy form 
number
3. Product status New
Revamped / Redesigned
Whether Bundled Product
4. Need the product addresses
5. Product target market
6. Product Marketing strategy
7. Date of submission of this Application 
to the Authority
Additional / Support Documents Submitted
8. Indicate additional / Support documents attached to this application (tick were 
applicable)
The policy (wording) Document   
The Proposal form
The Claim form
The Key Features Statement
The Marketing / Product brochure.
The Premium rating structure clearly showing 
expenses and commissions for both reinsurance and 
others payable to intermediaries.
The Actuarial Report for life insurance products. 
Service Level Agreement between an intermediary 
and	an	licensed	insurer	where	there	is	significant	
collaboration in product design, pricing and market-
ing of an insurance product
The Reinsurance agreement/statement. 
Copy of agreement on proposed arrangement be-
tween underwriters (for a bundled product)
The Product Business plan (for at least three years.) 
4939
Statement	of	Compliance	and	sign	off	by	the	Chief	Executive	Officer	of	the	applicant
9. I,	affirm	that	this	product	has	been	internally	reviewed	by	the	Company,	and	is	in	
compliance with the Authority’s guidance on insurance products, the Insurance Act 
and the Regulations thereunder.
Name …………………………………………….................……………………
Signature ………………………………………....................................................
Date …………………………………………........................................................
4940
Regulation 47(8)
Form 4 
Approval	Certificate	of	text	or	format	of	the	policy	or	proposal	form
The Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda pursuant to its powers under 
section 65 of the Insurance Act 2017, and the Regulations made thereunder 
hereby approves the the text or format of the policy or the proposal form: 
Product :  ……………………………………….............……
Company:  …………………………………….........…………
Category of Business: .…………………………………………............……..
Date of approval: ……………….………………………………......
This approval is subject to the following conditions and shall remain valid 
from the date of issue unless varied, suspended or revoked. 
CONDITIONS
1……………………………………………………………………………
2……………………………………………………………………………
3…………………………………………………………………................
…………………………………
Chief	Executive	Officer	
…………………......…………….
MATIA KASAIJA (M.P)
Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.