ACTS
SUPPLEMENT No. 5 8th June, 2017.
ACTS SUPPLEMENT
to The Uganda Gazette No. 33, Volume CX, dated 8th June, 2017.
Printed by UPPC, Entebbe, by Order of the Government.
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
THE INSURANCE ACT, 2017 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
Section
PART I—P RELIMINARY
1. Commencement. 
2. Interpretation.
3. Meaning of “bancassurance”.
4. Meaning of “unauthorised business”.
5. Meaning of “insolvent”.
6. Classification of insurance business.
7. Insurers to be bodies corporate.
8. Formation of mutual insurers. 
9. Use of the word “insurance” and persons to carry on insurance
business.
PART II—T HE INSURANCE REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF UGANDA
Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda
10. Continuance of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda.
11. Objectives of the Authority.
12. Functions of the Authority.
13. Power to cooperate with other authorities.
Board of the Authority. 
14. Board of the Authority.
15. Disqualification from appointment as member of the Board.
16. Tenure of office of members of the Board.
17. Remuneration of members of the Board.
18. Functions of the Board.
19. Meetings of the Board and related matters.
20. Committees of the Board.
1
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Section
PART III—S TAFF OF THE AUTHORITY.
Chief Executive Officer
21. Chief Executive Officer.
22. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer.
Secretary to the Authority
23. Secretary to the Authority.
Other officers of the Authority
24. Other officers and staff of the Authority.
PART IV—F INANCIAL PROVISIONS
25. Funds and sources of revenue of the Authority.
26. Duty to operate on sound financial principles.
27. Power to open and operate bank accounts.
28. Borrowing powers.
29. Estimates of income and expenditure.
30. Financial year of Authority.
31. Accounts and audit.
32. Publication of accounts by the Authority
PART V—L ICENSING OF INSURERS, HMOS AND
MICRO INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
33. Application of this Part.
34. Licensing required to conduct insurance business.
35. Categories of insurance business licences.
36. Licensing of health membership organisations.
Minimum capital requirements and security deposit
37. Minimum capital requirements.
38. Security deposit.
39. Use of the security deposit.
40. Capital requirements of mutual insurers.
Application for a licence
41. Application for a licence.
42. Factors to be considered in an application.
2
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Section
43. Processing of applications.
44. Granting of a licence.
45. Variation, suspension and revocation of a licence.
Other provisions relating to licensing
46. Provisions relating to licences.
PART VI—P RUDENTIAL REGULATION OF INSURERS, HMOS AND
MICRO INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
47. Application. 
48. Capital adequacy and other prudential requirements. 
49. Technical provisions.
50. Investments.
51. Maintenance of financial soundness.
52. No reduction in share capital of insurer or HMO.
53. Segregated funds. 
54. Restrictions on loans to officers and directors. 
55. Prohibition of loans to associate companies.
56. Other prohibitions applicable to insurers and HMOs. 
57. Distributions.
Governance and Management
58. Governance framework. 
59. Board of directors of insurer. 
60. Senior management.
61. Control functions.
62. Risk management.
Premiums and other related matters 
63. Payment of premium.
64. Approval of premium and commission rates. 
65. Approval of policy format forms and other matters.
66. Alteration of approved premium rates without approval.
PART VII—R EINSURANCE BUSINESS
67. Reinsurance arrangements.
68. Modification or cancellation in insurer ’s net retention.
69. Annual reinsurance returns.
3
Section
70. Prohibition of contracts with certain reinsurance companies.
71. Modifications where terms of reinsurance contracts not
favourable.
72. Negotiations not to be in personal capacity.
73. Foreign reinsurers’ representatives.
74. Mandatory reinsurance placements with international and national
organisations.
PART VIII—A MALGAMATIONS AND TRANSFERS.
75. Restrictions on amalgamations and transfers.
76. Application for amalgamation or transfer.
77. Notice of amalgamation or transfer.
78. Conditions for approval of transfer of life insurance. 
79. Decision of the Authority on amalgamation or transfer.
80. Effect of approval of amalgamation or transfer.
81. Application of provisions on amalgamation and transfer to HMOs.
PART IX—S PECIAL PROVISIONS ON INSURANCE
INTERMEDIARIES AND BANCASSURANCE
Unlicensed insurance intermediary business 
82. Prohibition on unlicensed insurance intermediary business. 
83. Insurance intermediary licences.
84. Insurance or reinsurance brokers to be bodies corporate. 
85. Application and qualifications for insurance intermediary licence.
86. Processing and granting of a licence.
87. Restrictions applicable to insurance intermediaries. 
88. Application of sections 58, 59 and 60.
89. Paid-up capital and professional indemnity for insurance broker or
reinsurance brokers. 
90. Premiums and other monies to be paid to insurer directly.
91. Loans to agents.
92. Portfolio transfer.
93. Direct relationship with an insurer.
94. Loss adjustors and loss assessors.
95. Variation, revocation or suspension of an intermediary’s licence.
4
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Section
Bancassurance
96. Prohibition on unauthorised bancassurance.
97. Application for bancassurance authorisation. 
98. Revocation of authorisation to undertake bancassurance.
PART X—S IGNIFICANT CHANGES IN CONTROL AND
MANAGEMENT AND CONSTITUTING INSTRUMENTS
99. Application of this Part.
100. Changes in control of licensee.
101. Authority’s powers concerning significant owners.
102. Authority to regulate significant owners.
103. Changes in directors, senior management and key persons in
control functions.
104. Authority’s powers concerning management and key persons in
control functions.
105. Information to be furnished by an insurer or HMO.
PART XI—F INANCIAL RECORDS AND STATEMENTS, FINANCIAL
REPORTING, AUDIT AND ACTUARIAL REQUIREMENTS
106. Maintenance of financial records.
107. Preparation of financial statements.
108. Auditing of accounts and auditors.
109. Audit and audit report.
Financial statements
110. Financial statements.
111. Group financial statements.
112. Powers of Authority in relation to financial statements and other
reports. 
Appointed actuary 
113. Appointment of actuary by an insurer and HMO.
114. Actuarial investigation and actuarial report.
5
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Section
PART XII—I NSPECTIONS, ACCESS TO INFORMATION
AND ENQUIRIES
115. Authority to inspect licensees.
116. Notice to provide information or produce documents 
PART XIII—R EMEDIAL MEASURES AND ENFORCEMENT
117. Application of this Part to financial institutions holding
bancassurance authorisation.
118. Recovery plans.
119. Recovery plan to be approved by the Authority.
120. Licensee to comply with recovery plan.
Directives 
121. Directives to licensees.
122. Directives by Authority to persons carrying on unauthorised
business. 
123. Appointment of investigator 
124. Powers of investigator 
Management take-over
125. Management takeover.
126. Duties of a statutory manager.
127. Removal of statutory manager. 
128. Application for and grant of protection order.
PART XIV—W INDING UPO F LICENSEES
AND OTHER MATTERS
129. Winding up.
130. Powers to wind up a licensee.
131. Winding up by the Authority.
6
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Section
PART XV—G ENERAL PROVISIONS
132. Requirement to consult.
133. Insurable interest policies.
134. Protection of information from disclosure.
135. Ombudsman to handle complaints and disputes.
136. Insurance Appeals Tribunal.
137. Tribunal to review decisions of the Authority.
138. Policyholders’ Compensation Fund.
139. Regulations on Policyholders’ Compensation Fund.
Insurance Training College 
140. Establishment of Insurance Training College.
141. Insurance training levy.
142. Prohibition of misleading advertisements.
143. Annual and other reports.
144. Service of notices on the Authority. 
145. Protection from liability.
146. Offences and penalties.
147. Display of a licence
148. Publication of details relating to licensees.
149. Consultation of foreign supervisors in relation to applicants for a
licence.
150. Compliance with anti money laundering and combating of
terrorism financing.
151. Regulations. 
152. Amendment of Schedules. 
153. Repeal and saving.
154. Transfer of assets and liabilities.
155. Transfer of service contracts. 
156. Pension fund and retired and redundant employees. 
157. Agreements and licences by the Insurance Regulatory Authority
of Uganda.
158. Pending court proceedings or orders of court. 
SCHEDULES 
7
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
THE INSURANCE ACT, 2017
An Act to repeal the Insurance Act, Cap. 213; to amend and
replace the law relating to insurance; to provide for the
regulation of insurance business; to continue in existence the
Insurance Regulator y Authority of Uganda as the body
responsible for the regulation of insurance business; and to
provide for related purposes.
DATE OF ASSENT: 23rd May, 2017.
Date of Commencement: See section 1.
BE IT ENACTED by Parliament as follows:
PART I—P RELIMINARY
1. Commencement.
This Act shall come into force on such date as the Minister may , by
statutory instrument appoint; but the Minister may appoint different
dates for different provisions of this Act.
2. Interpretation.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
8
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“actuary” means a person who is a member or a fellow of a
professional institute, faculty, society or association of
actuaries, and recognized by the Authority;
“Africa-Re” means the African Reinsurance Corporation
established under the Agreement Establishing the African
Reinsurance Corporation;
“Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory Authority of
Uganda continued in existence by this Act;
“bancassurance authorisation” means an authorisation to
undertake bancassurance;
“Board” means the Board of the Authority;
“Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer of
the Authority;
“commercial bank” has the meaning assigned to it in the
Financial Institutions Act, 2004;
“control”, in relation to a licensee, has the meaning specified in
the Regulations;
“constituting documents” means—
(a) in the case of a company, its memorandum and articles
of association; and 
(b) in the case of any other entity , such document or
documents that constitute and govern the entity;" 
“control function” means— 
(a) in relation to an insurer, a function specified in section
61(1); 
(b)  in relation to a health membership or ganisation, a
function specified in section 61(2);
9
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) in relation to an insurance intermediary, a function
specified in section 85(6);
“currency point” has the value assigned to it in Schedule 1;
“customer” means—
(a) in the case of an insurer, a policyholder of the insurer
or a beneficiary under an insurance contract entered
into by the insurer, as insurer; 
(b) in the case of a health membership organisation, a
member of the health membership organisation; 
(c) in the case of a financial institution undertaking
bancassurance, a   person to whom the financial
institution provides, agrees to provide or has provided
a service for which bancassurance authorisation is
required;
(d) in the case of an insurance intermediary , a person to
whom the insurance intermediary provides, agrees to
provide or has provided a service for which an
insurance intermediary licence is required;
“direct insurance business” means the business of undertaking
liability as insurer under direct insurance contracts; 
“direct insurance contract” means an insurance contract that is
not a reinsurance contract;
“director” means a member of the governing body of a body
corporate;
“distribution” has the meaning specified in section 57;
“domestic supervisory authority” means an authority in Uganda
which performs functions corresponding or similar to those
performed by the Authority or regulates or supervises any
type of financial service;
10
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“financial institution” has the meaning assigned to it in the
Financial Institutions Act, 2004.
“financial statement”, in relation to a licensee that is a body
corporate, means—
(a) a statement of the financial position of the licensee as
at the last date of the financial year;
(b) a statement of the financial performance of the
licensee in relation to the financial year;
(c) a statement of cash flows for the licensee in relation to
the financial year;
(d) any statement relating to the prospects for the business
of the licensee;
“fit and proper person” means a fit and proper person
determined in accordance with the criteria specified in
Schedule 2;  
“foreign insurer” means a foreign reinsurer is that incorporated
and licensed as a reinsurer under the laws of a country other
than Uganda except Africa Re and PTA Re;
“foreign reinsurer” means a foreign insurer whose primary
business is the business of entering into reinsurance
contracts, as reinsurer;
“foreign supervisory authority” means an authority in a jurisdiction
outside Uganda which performs functions corresponding or
similar to those performed by the Authority or regulates or
supervises any type of financial service;
“former licensee” means a person who has at any time been a
licensee but has ceased to be so; 
11
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“group in relation to a group of which a licensed insurer is a
member” means a number of companies that do business in
different markets under common administrative or financial
control, whose members are linked by relations of
interpersonal trust on the basis of similar personal ethnic or
commercial background;
“health benefit plan” means a contract satisfying the criteria
prescribed by the Minister by regulations; 
“health membership organisation” or “HMO” means an
organisation engaged in the business of undertaking
liability in respect of funding health care, by way of
membership;
“insurance agent” means a person appointed and authorised by
an insurer to solicit for applications for insurance or
negotiate insurance coverage on behalf of the insurer or to
perform other functions of an insurance nature that may be
assigned to him or her by the insurer, and who in
consideration for his or her services receives commission or
other remuneration from the insurer;
“insurance broker” means a person, not being an insurance
agent, who acting as an independent contractor for a
commission or remuneration—
(a) negotiates or arranges insurance contracts on behalf of
an insurer or prospective insured, other than himself or
herself; or
(b) advises an insured or prospective insured on his or her
insurance needs and requirements;
“insurance business” means the business of undertaking liability
as an insurer or a reinsurer under an insurance contract;
12
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“insurance contract” means a contract under which one party,
known as the insurer, in exchange for a premium, agrees
with another party, known as the policy holder, to make a
payment, or provide a benefit to the policy holder or
another person on the occurrence of a specified uncertain
event which, if it occurs, will be adverse to the interests of
the policy holder or to the interests of the person who will
receive the payment or benefit;
“insurance intermediary” means an insurance agent, an
insurance broker, a risk advisor, a loss assessor, a third
party administrator, or a reinsurance broker.
“insurance training levy” means the levy specified in section
141;
“international financial reporting standards” means the
standards issued, from time to time, by the International
Accounting Standards Board;
“key person in a control function” means an individual
appointed to undertake, or have responsibility for , and
oversight of, a control function;
“licence” means a licence under this Act and includes a
bancassurance authorisation; 
“licenced insurer” means a person who holds an insurer ’s
licence issued under section 35(1)(a);
“licensee” means a person who holds any licence issued under
this Act;
“life insurance business” means insurance business of a class
specified as life insurance business under this Act;
“life insurer” means an insurer whose licence authorises the
insurer to carry on life insurance business;
13
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“loss assessor” means a person licensed under this Act to
undertake the business of assessing and investigating losses
on behalf of an insurer or insured; 
“micro insurance” means insurance for the protection of low-
income people against specific perils in exchange for
regular premium payments proportionate to the likelihood
and cost of risk involved; 
“micro insurance agent” means a person holding a
microinsurance agent licence;
“micro insurance organisation” means a person holding a micro
insurance organisation licence;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for finance;
“mutual insurer” means a company which by its constitution
only policyholders are members of the company and which
has no share capital; 
“national reinsurance company” means the company approved
by the Authority as a national reinsurance company of
which more than fifty one percent of the shares of the
company are owned by licensees incorporated in Uganda or
the decisions of the company are arrived at by the majority
who are licensees incorporated in Uganda;
“non-life insurance business” means insurance business of a
class prescribed as non-life insurance business;
“non-life insurer” means an insurer whose licence authorises the
insurer to carry on non-life insurance business; 
“policy holder” in relation to an insurance contract or a health
benefit plan, means the person who entered into the
insurance contract or health benefit plan with the insurer or
HMO, if the rights of that person under the contract have
been assigned or transferred, the person who has those
rights;
14
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
“premium” means the consideration for entering into an
insurance contract;
“Reinsurance broker” is a specialist intermediary involved in the
placing of reinsurance;
“reinsurance business” means the business of undertaking
liability as a reinsurer under reinsurance contracts;
“reinsurance contract” means an insurance contract under which
one insurer, called the reinsurer, indemnifies, or otherwise
compensates, another insurer, called the cedant, against
losses on one or more contracts of insurance entered into by
the cedant;
“reinsurer” means a person holding a reinsurers licence; 
“repealed Act” means the Insurance Act, Cap. 213;
“risk advisor” means a person who, by way of business, assesses
and advises on insurable risks;
“secretary” means the secretary to the Authority appointed under
this Act; 
“segregated life fund” means a fund established under section
53;
“senior manager”, in relation to a licensee, means an individual
appointed by the licensee who—
(a) acts as the chief executive officer of the licensee or
occupies an equivalent position under a different
name; 
(b) holds a position that requires the individual to be
answerable to the directors of the licensee; 
15
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) has responsibilities that include direct involvement in
the licensee’s management or decision making process
at a senior level; or
(d) holds such other position or undertakes such other
function and duties as may be prescribed by the
Authority.
“significant owner” means a person who exercises control over
a body corporate within the meaning of regulations made
under this Act;
“statutory manager” means a person appointed under section
125(1) of this Act by the Authority as management take-
over to look after the policyholders’ interests by managing
the business assets and affairs of the insurer, taking into
custody any of its assets and any of its subsidiary’s assets;
“takaful insurance” means insurance conducted in accordance
with Sharia’h principles;
“third party administrator” means a person who provides
services to a HMO or a licensed insurer in relation to the
administration of health benefit plans or health insurance
policies;
“Tribunal” means the Insurance Appeals T ribunal established
under the repealed Act and continued in existence in
accordance with this Act;
“valid licence” means a licence that authorises the type of
activity or business being carried on by the holder of the
licence for the particular time period;
“ZEP-RE” means ZEP-RE (PT A Reinsurance Company)
established under an Agreement of the Heads of State and
Governments of the COMESA Region on 21st November
1990.
16
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
3. Meaning of “bancassurance”.
(1) Subject to subsection (3), bancassurance is an arrangement
between a financial institution and an insurer or HMO under which
the financial institution distributes to its customers, through its
distribution channels, an insurance product of the insurer or HMO.
(2) Without limiting the general effect of subsection (1),
bancassurance includes an arrangement under which—
(a) a financial institution acts as an agent for the insurer or
HMO; or
(b) a financial institution enters into a group or  master
insurance contract, as policy holder, with the intention that
the customers of the financial institution, or a class of them,
obtain insurance cover under the contract. 
(3) An insurance contract entered into by a financial institution
as a policyholder where the sole purpose of the policy is to provide
benefits to employees of the financial institution, whether or not the
employees are required to contribute towards the cost of the contract
shall not be taken as bancassurance.
(4) For purposes of bancassurance, “Financial Institution”
means a company classified as a Bank under the Second Schedule to
the Financial Institutions Act 2004 and licensed as a bank by the
Central Bank and includes a commercial bank, merchant bank,
mortgage bank and post office savings bank; or a company licensed
by the Central Bank as a Micro Finance Deposit-T aking under the
Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003.
4. Meaning of “unauthorised business”.
Subject to any exemption granted in accordance with this Act, a
person carries on unauthorised business where the person carries on
any business or activity for which a licence is required without a valid
licence issued by the Authority.
17
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
5. Meaning of “insolvent”.
(1) An insurer or HMO is insolvent where the insurer or HMO
does not meet the minimum solvency capital requirements prescribed
in the Regulations.
(2) An insurance intermediary is insolvent if the value of its
liabilities exceeds the value of its assets or is unable to pay its debts
as they fall due for payment.
6. Classification of insurance business.
For the purposes of this Act, insurance business comprises life
insurance business and non-life insurance business.
7. Insurers to be bodies corporate.
(1) A person shall not carry on insurance business in Uganda
except a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2012, an
insurance corporation established by law , a cooperative insurance
society registered under the Cooperative Societies Act or a mutual
insurer.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a—
(a) foreign reinsurer that enters into a reinsurance contract with
a licensed insurer or a retrocession agreement with a
licensed reinsurer; or
(b) foreign insurer that carries on insurance business in
accordance with an exemption granted by the Authority
under section 34(4).
8. Formation of mutual insurers.
(1) Any twenty five persons but not more than three hundred
may, by subscribing their names to a memorandum of association,
form a mutual insurer.
(2) The memorandum of association of a mutual insurer shall
state—
18
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) the insurance business or any class of the insurance
business which is to be carried on;
(b) the name of the company, including the expression “mutual
insurance company” in that name;
(c) the location of the principal office of the company;
(d) the limitation of liability of its members;
(e) the amount of guarantee capital;
(f) the rights of the contributors towards the guarantee capital;
(g) the methods of clearing the guarantee capital;
(h) the particulars of the governing body of the company;
(i) the method of distributing surplus;
(j) the articles and rules governing the company.
(3) Where a person desires to become a member of a mutual
insurer, he or she shall enter into the instrument of subscription for
members, the subject matter and the amount of insurance desired and
he or she shall affix his or her signature to the instrument.
(4) An application for licensing a mutual insurer under this Act
shall be made within a period that may be prescribed by the
Authority.
9. Use of the word “insurance” and persons to carr y on
insurance business.
(1) Subject to subsection (2) and to any exemptions specified in
the Regulations, a person shall not, except with the prior written
approval of the Authority, use the words “insurance”, “assurance” or
“reinsurance” or any derivations in English or any other language as
part of his or her business name other than a licensee, provided that
the name does not suggest that the licensee carries on any licensable
business other than the business that it is authorised by its licence to
carry on.
19
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A person shall not issue any insurance policy,  other than a
person licensed under this Act, on—
(a) persons who at the time of effecting the insurance contract
are residents of Uganda;
(b) goods or assets situated in Uganda;
(c) ships, aircraft or other vehicles registered in Uganda; or
(d) goods imported from other countries except personal
effects and donations.
(3) All local risks and persons, including imports shall be
insured by insurance companies licensed to carryout business in
Uganda.
(4) The regulations may prescribe other words or phrases to
which subsection (1) applies. 
(5) A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not
exceeding one thousand currency points.
PART II—T HE INSURANCE REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF UGANDA
Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda
10. Continuance of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of
Uganda.
(1) The Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda established
under the repealed Act is continued in existence in accordance with
this Act.
(2) The Authority is a body corporate with perpetual succession
and a common seal and may for the purposes of dischar ging its
functions under this Act—
(a) acquire, hold or dispose of movable and immovable
property;
20
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) sue and be sued in its corporate name;
(c) do all acts and things that a body corporate may lawfully
do.
(3) The common seal of the Authority shall be in a form
determined by the Board.
(4) The common seal of the Authority shall be applied in
accordance with Schedule 3.
11. Objectives of the Authority.
(1) The objectives of the Authority are—
(a) to promote and facilitate the maintenance of a sound,
efficient, fair, transparent and stable insurance sector; 
(b) to promote and uphold public confidence in the insurance
sector; 
(c) to protect the interests of persons who are, or who may
become, policy holders of  insurers or customers of other
licensees; 
(d) to regulate and supervise licensees on a risk-sensitive basis; 
(e) to promote effective competition in the insurance sector in
the interests of consumers, the growth and development of
the insurance sector and the development of an inclusive
insurance sector.
(2) In considering the measures to be taken to protect persons
who are, or who may become, policy holders of insurers or customers
of other licensees, the Authority shall have regard to—
(a) the dif fering degrees of experience and expertise that
different policy holders and customers may have in relation
to insurance products and the insurance sector; 
21
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) the need that policy holders and customers may have for
advice and accurate information; and 
(c) the general principle that policy holders and customers
should take responsibility for their informed decisions.
(3) In seeking to promote the development of an inclusive
insurance sector in Uganda, the Authority shall have regard to the
need to ensure that the regulation and supervision of relevant
providers, products and services is proportionate.
12. Functions of the Authority.
(1) For the attainment of its objectives, the functions of the
Authority are—
(a) to regulate, supervise, monitor and control the insurance
sector;
(b) to establish standards for the conduct of business in the
insurance sector and to issue such guidance as it considers
appropriate; 
(c) to control entry to  and exit from the insurance sector
through the issuance, variation or revocation of licences in
accordance with this Act;
(d) to take appropriate action against persons carrying on
unauthorised business;
(e) to supervise licensees on an individual basis and, where
appropriate, on a group wide and cross border basis;
(f) to monitor compliance with, or investigate conduct that
constitutes or may constitute a contravention of this Act;
(g) to take action in relation to licensees that are insolvent or
likely to become insolvent; 
22
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(h) to monitor the operation of the insurance sector and to
conduct inquiries and investigations into any matter
relating to the insurance sector or participants in the
insurance sector; 
(i) to keep under review the effectiveness of this Act and
regulations and, where appropriate, initiate and make
proposals to the Minister concerning this Act and other
legislation relevant to the insurance sector; 
(j) to receive and resolve insurance related complaints; 
(k) to receive complaints from members of the public on the
conduct of a person licensed under this Act and arbitrate
and grant restitution to the complainant, as may be
possible;
(l) to co-operate with, and provide assistance, in accordance
with the law, to local and foreign supervisory authorities
and law enforcement authorities;
(m) to perform such other duties, which in the opinion of the
Authority, are necessary or expedient for the dischar ge of
its functions under this Act;
(n) to advise Government on adequate insurance protection and
security for national assets and national properties; 
(o) to promote awareness of, and undertake public education
concerning, the insurance sector.
(2) In undertaking its functions, the Authority shall have regard
to—
(a) the need to implement international standards and best
practice in relation to the regulation and supervision of the
insurance sector;
23
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) effective risk management by insurers and other licensees 
(3) Subject to this Act, the Authority shall be independent and
shall not, in the performance of its duties, be subject to the direction
or control of any person or authority.
13. Power to cooperate with other authorities.
(1) The Authority may, on the written request of any domestic or
foreign supervisory authority, or domestic law enforcement
authority—
(a) undertake on-site inspections or obtain information or
documents; or
(b) appoint one or more competent persons to investigate any
matter that requires investigation. 
(2) The Authority may, in deciding whether to exercise the
power conferred on it by this section, take into account—
(a) a domestic and in the case of a foreign supervisory
authority, whether reciprocal assistance would be given to
the Authority in the country or territory of the foreign
supervisory authority;
(b) the nature and seriousness of the matter to which the
request for assistance relates and whether the assistance can
be obtained by other means;
(c) the relevance of the information or documentation to the
enquiry to which the request relates; 
(d) whether it is otherwise appropriate, in the interests of
customers or prospective customers of a licensee and the
public interest, to provide the assistance sought; and
(e) such other matters as the Authority considers relevant. 
24
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a), the Authority may
require the domestic or foreign supervisory authority making the
request to give a written undertaking, in such form as the Authority
may require, to provide reciprocal assistance to the Authority.
(4) A decision by the Authority shall be made only where the
Authority—
(a) has received satisfactory assurances from the domestic or
foreign supervisory authority that any information and
documentation provided to it will not be used in any
criminal proceedings against the person providing it, other
than proceedings for an offence of perjury or any
equivalent offence;
(b) the domestic or foreign supervisory authority undertakes to
make such contribution towards the cost of exercising its
powers as the Authority considers appropriate; and 
(c) is satisfied that the domestic or foreign supervisory
authority is subject to adequate legal restrictions on further
disclosure of the information and documents and that it will
not, without the written permission of the Authority—
(i) disclose information or documents provided to it to
any person other than an officer or employee of the
Authority engaged in the exercise of any of its
supervisory functions; or
(ii) take any action on information or documents
provided to it.
(5) The Authority reserves the right not to provide the
information requested.
(6) The Authority may share information with other supervisors
and also inform them before taking any action that might reasonably
be considered to af fect group entities under their supervision and
where prior notification is not possible, the Authority shall inform the
relevant supervisors as soon as possible after taking action.
25
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Board of the Authority 
14. Board of the Authority.
(1) The Authority shall have a Board, which shall be the
governing body of the Authority. 
(2) The Board shall comprise of—
(a) a chairperson;
(b) a representative of the ministry responsible for finance,
who shall be at the rank of Commissioner or above;
(c) a representative of the Governor of the Bank of Uganda;
(d) a  representative of the Insurance Training College;
(e) a representative of the ministry responsible for health;
(f) two persons representing the public, one of whom shall be
the deputy chairperson;
(g) the Chief Executive Officer of the Capital Markets
Authority; and
(h) the Chief Executive Officer of the Uganda Retirements
Benefits Regulatory Authority; and
(i) the chief executive officer, who shall have no right to vote.
(3) The chairperson and the persons referred to in subsection
(2)(f) shall be appointed by the Minister from among persons who
have knowledge, experience and skills in insurance, banking , finance
and actuarial science.
(4) The Minister shall, when appointing the members of the
Board, ensure that there is a balance of skills and gender.
26
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
15. Disqualification from appointment as member of the Board.
A person shall not be appointed to the Board who—
(a) has been convicted of an offence other than a traffic offence
under this Act or of an offence involving dishonesty or
fraud by a competent court in Uganda or elsewhere;
(b) has been adjudged bankrupt under any law in force in
Uganda and has not been discharged;
(c) has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment for six months or more without the option of
a fine by a competent court in Uganda or elsewhere; or
(d) is a Member of Parliament, a Minister or a member of a
local government council;
(e) is a public of ficer, except those stated under section
14(2)(b)(c)(g)(h) and (i);
(f) is a director or employee of a licensee or who has a
financial interest in a licensee, including a shareholder of a
licensee; 
(g) is disqualified from acting as a director of a company under
the Companies Act, 2012.
16. Tenure of office of members of the Board.
(1) A member of the Board shall hold of fice for three years and
is eligible for reappointment for one further term.
(2) The members of the Board shall hold of fice on terms and
conditions specified in their instruments of appointment.
(3) A member of the Board may, at any time, resign from his or
her office in writing addressed to the Minister, giving notice of not
less than one month.
27
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(4) The Minister may, at any time suspend or remove a member
of the Board only—
(a) for inability to perform the functions of his or her office
arising from infirmity of body or mind;
(b) for misbehaviour or misconduct;
(c) for incompetence;
(d) for absence, without prior permission of the chairperson, or
without reasonable cause to the satisfaction of the Minister,
from more than four consecutive meetings of the Board;
(e) for bankruptcy or insolvency;
(f) for conviction of a criminal offence, in Uganda or
elsewhere, in respect of which the maximum penalty
exceeds six months imprisonment without the option of a
fine;
(g) where information relating to the conduct of a member,
which could have precluded his or her appointment if it had
been made available to the Minister , is brought to the
attention of the Minister; or
(h) where any of the grounds for disqualification under section
15 become applicable to a member subsequent to his or her
appointment.
(5) If a member of the Board is or becomes aware that any of the
grounds for suspension or removal specified in subsection (4)(e), (f),
(g) or (h) apply to him or her, the member shall, within fifteen days,
give written notice to the Minister and the Chairperson or, if the
member is the Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson.
28
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(6) Where it appears to the Minister that there is cause to remove
a member under subsection (4), the Minister shall notify the member
concerned in writing and shall give the member an opportunity to
submit his or her explanation to the Minister and to be heard in person
or represented by his or her lawyer.
(7) Where a member dies or is removed from office under this
section, the Minister shall appoint another person qualified, in
accordance with the appointment provisions of this Act, to replace the
member and the member appointed shall hold office for the remainder
of the term of the previous member. 
(8) The Minister shall publicly disclose the reasons for the
disqualification of any member of the Board.
17. Remuneration of members of the Board.
The chairperson and members of the Board shall be paid such
remuneration determined by the Minister and specified in their
instruments of appointment.
18. Functions of the Board.
(1) The Board shall be responsible for the general direction and
supervision of the Authority.
(2) W ithout limiting the general effect of subsection (1), the
Board shall—
(a) advise the Government on policy matters concerning
insurance generally , and assist in the co-ordination and
implementation of the government policy relating to
insurance;
(b) oversee the operations and management of the Authority; 
(c) ensure that the Authority establishes and maintains— 
29
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(i)   an appropriate governance framework; and
(ii) adequate procedures; and controls, including an
internal audit function and rules governing the
disclosure of interests by employees, consultants,
experts, advisors and agents of the Authority; 
(d) provide guidance to the Chief Executive Officer and staff of
the Authority;
(e) establish and approve rules and procedures for
appointment, promotion, termination, discipline and terms
and conditions of service of the staff of the Authority;
(f) review and approve strategic, business and operating plans,
budgets, reports and audited financial statements of the
Authority;
(g) perform any other function conferred by this Act or which
may be necessary for the proper implementation of this
Act.
19. Meetings of the Board and related matters.
Schedule 3 has effect in relation to meetings of the Board and other
matters provided for in that Schedule.
20. Committees of the Board.
(1) The Board may appoint committees—
(a) to inquire into and advise the Board  on any matter
concerning the functions of the Authority as the Board  may
refer to the committee;
(b) to exercise such powers or perform such functions of the
Authority as the Board may delegate or refer to the
committee.
30
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A committee appointed under subsection (1) shall consist of
a chairperson and other persons whether members of the Board or not
as the Board may determine.
(3) The Board may require a committee appointed under this
section to act jointly or in co-operation with any other committee.
(4) The members of a committee appointed under this section
may be paid such allowances as the Board may, with the written
approval of the Minister, determine.
(5) Subject to any direction given by the Board, a committee
appointed under this section may regulate its own procedure.
PART III—S TAFF OF THE AUTHORITY.
Chief Executive Officer
21. Chief Executive Officer.
(1) The Authority shall have a Chief Executive Officer who shall
be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board on
terms and conditions specified in his or her instrument of
appointment. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall be a person of high moral
character and proven integrity , with relevant professional
qualifications and experience relating to the functions of the
Authority.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall hold office for five years
and is eligible for reappointment for one further term. 
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall cease to hold office if—
(a) he or she resigns;
(b) he or she is declared bankrupt or insolvent or has made an
arrangement with his or her creditors;
31
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) he or she is convicted of a criminal offence, in Uganda or
elsewhere, in respect of which the maximum penalty
exceeds six months imprisonment without the option of a
fine;
(d) he or she is removed from office by the Minister, on
recommendation of the Board, for incompetence, inability
to perform the functions of his or her office arising from
infirmity of body or mind; or
(e) he or she is removed from office by the Minister for
misbehaviour, misconduct or incompetence.
(5) Where it appears to the Minister that there is cause to remove
the Chief Executive Officer under subsection (4), the Minister shall
notify the Chief Executive Officer in writing and shall give the Chief
Executive Officer an opportunity to submit his or her explanation to
the Minister and to be heard in person or represented by his or her
lawyer.
22. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer.
(1) The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for the day to day
operations and administration of the Authority and shall be the
accounting officer of the Authority.
(2) Subject to this Act and to the general supervision and control
of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer is responsible for—
(a) the implementation of the policies and programmes of the
Authority and reporting on them to the Board;
(b) the proper management of the funds and property of the
Authority;
(c) the organisation and control of the staff of the Authority; 
(d) the development of an operating plan to guide the
Authority in achieving its objectives; 
32
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(e) the development of an economic, efficient and cost
effective internal management structure; 
(f) proposing and implementing the strategic plan, business
plan and annual plan of the Authority; 
(g) ensuring that the policies of the Authority are implemented
and that the agreed objectives, targets and service standards
are met; 
(h) providing advice as required on all matters within the
Authority’s responsibility; and 
(i) performing any other duty necessary for the
implementation of this Act as may be assigned to him or
her by the Board.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer is answerable to the Board. 
Secretary to the Authority
23. Secretary to the Authority.
(1) There shall be a secretary to the Authority who shall be
appointed by the Board on terms and conditions specified in the
instrument of appointment.
(2) The secretary to the Authority shall be responsible for—
(a) arranging the business at meetings of the Board;
(b) taking the minutes of the meetings of the Board;
(c) keeping the records of the decisions and other policy
records of the Board.
(3) In the performance of his or her functions, the secretary is
answerable to the Chief Executive Officer.
(4) The secretary to the Authority shall possess the relevant
professional qualifications and experience relating to the functions of
the Authority. 
33
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Other officers of the Authority
24. Other officers and staff of the Authority.
(1) The Board may appoint such officers and staff of the
Authority as may be necessary for the proper and efficient
performance of the functions of the Authority.
(2) The employees appointed under this section shall hold office
on terms and conditions determined by the Board and specified in
their instruments of appointment. 
(3) The Board shall regulate the manner of appointment, terms
and conditions of service and the discipline of the staff appointed
under this section.
PART IV—F INANCIAL PROVISIONS
25. Funds and sources of revenue of the Authority.
(1) The funds and sources of revenue of the Authority shall
consist of—
(a) money appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the
Authority;
(b) grants, gifts or donations from the Government or other
sources made with the approval of the Minister;
(c) monies accruing to the Authority by way of revenue; 
(d) licence fees and char ges payable by licensees under this
Act;
(e) annual compliance fee; and
(f) any other monies, including fines imposed by the Authority
for contravention or non-compliance with this Act. 
34
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) Every licensee shall pay to the Authority an annual
contribution of a sum determined by the Authority, by regulations,
after consulting with the Uganda Insurers Association, the Uganda
Association of Insurance Brokers, the Uganda Association of
Engineers, Valuers and Loss Assessors, Insurance Agents Association
and HMOs.
(3) All monies under sub section (1)(d), (e) and (f) received by
the Authority shall be retained by the Authority and used in
accordance with the provisions of section 29(3) of the Public Finance
Management Act.
26. Duty to operate on sound financial principles.
In the performance of its functions under this Act, the Board shall
have due regard to sound financial principles. 
27. Power to open and operate bank accounts.
The Authority may, with the authority of the Accountant General,
open and maintain such other accounts as are necessary for the
performance of the functions of the Authority
28. Borrowing powers.
Subject to article 159 of the Constitution, the Board may, with the
approval of Parliament, borrow money as may be required for
meeting its obligations or for the dischar ge of the functions of the
Authority under this Act.
29. Estimates of income and expenditure.
(1) The Chief Executive Of ficer shall, within three months
before the end of each financial year , cause to be prepared and
submitted to the Board for its approval, estimates of the income and
expenditure of the Authority for the next financial year.
(2) The Board shall, within two months of receipt of the
estimates referred to in subsection (1), cause to be submitted to the
Minister for his or her approval, the estimates of income and
expenditure as approved by the Board.
35
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
30. Financial year of Authority.
The financial year of the Authority shall be same as the financial year
of Government.
31. Accounts and audit.
(1) The Authority shall keep proper books of accounts and all
records relating to the transactions and affairs of the Authority.
(2) The Auditor General or an auditor appointed by the Auditor
General shall, in each financial year, audit the accounts of the
Authority.
(3) The Auditor General shall submit the audited accounts of the
Authority to Parliament in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act, 2015.
32. Publication of accounts by the Authority.
The Authority shall publish its audited financial statements at least
annually in a Uganda newspaper with wide circulation.
PART V—L ICENSING OF INSURERS, HMOS AND
MICRO INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
33. Application of this Part.
(1) This Part applies to insurers, HMOs and micro insurance
organisations unless otherwise stated.  
(2) The Authority may , due to the nature of micro insurance
organisations and the circumstances, modify the provisions of this
Part to better apply to micro insurance or ganisations. 
34. Licensing required to conduct insurance business.
(1) Subject to subsection (4), a person shall not carry on, or
purport to carry on, insurance business, reinsurance business or the
business of a HMO in Uganda without a valid licence issued by the
Authority.
(2) A foreign insurer shall not occupy or operate an office in
Uganda without the prior written approval of the Authority 
36
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), the Authority may
authorize the effecting of insurance with a foreign insurer in
exceptional circumstances.
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to—
(a) a foreign reinsurer that enters into a reinsurance contract
with a licensed insurer or a retrocession agreement with a
licensed reinsurer; or
(b) a foreign insurer that carries on insurance business in
accordance with an exemption granted by the Authority.
(5) A person shall not be granted a licence unless the person
satisfies conditions for the grant of a licence prescribed by this Act. 
(6) A person who carries on, or purports to carry on, insurance
business, reinsurance business or business as a HMO in contravention
of this Act is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency
points.
(7) A foreign insurer that contravenes subsection (2) commits an
offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding five
thousand currency points.
35. Categories of insurance business licences.
(1) The Authority may issue the following insurance business
licences under this Act—
(a) an insurer’s licence which authorises the holder to carry on
direct insurance business or reinsurance business with other
licensed insurers;
(b) a reinsurer’s licence which authorises the holder to carry on
reinsurance business; 
37
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) a HMO licence which authorises the holder to provide
health benefit plans to persons resident in Uganda only; and 
(d) a micro insurance licence which authorises the holder to
carry on micro insurance business only.
(2) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by statutory instrument, prescribe other categories of insurance
business licences. 
36. Licensing of health membership organisations.
(1) A person proposing to carry on business as a health
membership organisation shall apply to the Authority, in a prescribed
form, for a licence, which application shall be considered by the
Authority.
(2) Licensed health membership organisations shall be regulated
in accordance with regulations made under this Act, in consultation
with the Minister responsible for health and other stakeholders.
Minimum capital requirements and security deposit
37. Minimum capital requirements.
(1) A licensed insurer and a HMO shall have and maintain paid-
up capital of not less than the amount prescribed in regulations.
(2) Every share in an insurer or HMO shall be fully paid for in
cash unless the Authority otherwise approves in writing.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a  HMO, a micro insurance
organisation  shall have a paid up capital as may be prescribed by the
Minister, by regulations.
(4) This section does not apply to a mutual insurer . 
38
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
38. Security deposit.
(1) Every insurer shall hold an account maintained by the insurer
with a commercial bank approved by the Authority of a sum equal to
ten percent of the paid-up capital of the insurer. 
(2) The security deposit made under this section shall be
considered part of the assets in respect of the capital of the insurer. 
(3) The deposits made under subsection (1) shall be invested by
the insurer in Government securities or any other investment as may
be approved by the Authority.
(4) All income accruing from a security deposit made under this
section shall be payable to the insurer making the deposit. 
(5) This section does not apply to a mutual insurer . 
39. Use of the security deposit.
(1) The security deposit of an insurer or HMO shall be applied
in the following priority—
(a) to pay insurance claims;
(b) to satisfy the costs of, or associated with any remedial
measures or enforcement powers exercised by the
Authority in relation to the insurer, or the running-off and
winding up of the business of the insurer or the liquidation
of the insurer; 
(c) in the event that the insurer is liquidated, to pay to the
liquidator of the insurer for the purposes of the winding up.
(d) to make a payment or transfer to the insurer in accordance
with this Act; 
(2) An insurer or HMO that holds a security deposit—
39
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) shall deal with the funds deposited in accordance with the
written directions of the Authority; and
(a) shall not release the security deposit and the interest
accrued from the deposit, except with the written
permission of the Authority. 
(3) Where an insurer ceases to carry on insurance business, it
may apply to the Authority for approval for the withdrawal of the
security deposit and the Authority may authorise the release of the
deposit if it is satisfied that the insurance business has been fully
wound up and the insurer has no outstanding liabilities under any
insurance contracts.
40. Capital requirements of mutual insurers.
The capital requirements of a mutual insurance company shall be
prescribed in regulations made under this Act.
Application for a licence
41. Application for a licence.
(1) A person proposing to carry on insurance business shall
apply to the Authority , in a prescribed form, for a licence, which
application shall be considered by the Authority.
(2) Where an application under subsection (1) does not provide
all the relevant information or if clarification is necessary, the
applicant may be called upon to provide the information or
clarification to complete the application.
42. Factors to be considered in an application.
The Authority shall, when considering an application for a licence,
satisfy itself as to—
(a) the financial status and antecedents of the applicant;
40
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) the competence and integrity of the proposed management
and administration;
(c) the adequacy of the applicant’s capital structure, earning
prospects, business plans, financial plans, reinsurance and
retention proposals;
(d) whether the public interest would be served by granting a
licence;
(e) the governance framework of the applicant;
(f) proposed reinsurance and retrocession arrangements;
(g) such other matters as the Authority may consider
appropriate.
43. Processing of applications.
(1) The Authority shall, within four months after receipt of a
complete application, investigate and prepare a detailed report in
respect of each application.
(2) The Authority shall, for the purpose of considering and
making a report on an application under subsection (1), appoint a
committee of not less than three members of the Authority which
committee shall report its recommendations to the Authority in
writing.
44. Granting of a licence.
(1) The Authority may—
(a) if it is satisfied that the applicant complies with the
provisions of this Act, grant a licence to the applicant, on
the payment of the prescribed fee;
(b) refuse to grant a licence and give reasons in writing for its
decision.
41
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) An insurance licence issued under subsection (1) remains in
force until suspended, varied or revoked.
(3) The Authority shall communicate its decision under
subsection (1) to the applicant within sixty days from receipt of a
complete application.
(4) The applicant may appeal to the T ribunal within thirty days
from the receipt of the communication of the Authority, if aggrieved
by the decision of the Authority and the Tribunal shall make a
decision within thirty days from the date of the appeal.
45. Variation, suspension and revocation of a licence.
(1) The Authority may at any time vary , suspend or revoke the
licence of an insurer or HMO to carryout business under this Act
where—
(a) it is in the public interest or it is required for protecting
policy holders’ interests;
(b) the business of the insurer is not being conducted in
accordance with sound insurance principles and practices;
(c) the relevant minimum prescribed paid up capital  or
security deposit requirements have not been complied with
by the insurer;
(d) the insurer is not in compliance with the capital adequacy
requirements prescribed in regulations;
(e) the insurer has not commenced insurance business within
one hundred and eighty days  of  obtaining a licence to
operate;
(f) the insurer has made a false statement to the Authority
which statement is material to his or her licensing and
which he or she knows or might have known to be false;
42
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(g) a judgment arising out of any insurance liability obtained in
any court in Uganda against an insurer remains unsatisfied
without good reason for more than ninety days from the
date of final judgment;
(h) the insurer has ceased to qualify as an insurer under this
Act;
(i) the insurer repeatedly acts in an illegal way or ignores the
requirements of the Authority;
(j) the insurer has refused or failed to abide by the decision of
the Authority, to settle a claim or  complaint in accordance
with this Act.
(2) The Authority shall, before the variation, suspension or
revocation of any licence, give written notice to the insurer requiring
the insurer to remedy any breach, and where the breach cannot be
remedied, to show cause to the satisfaction of the Authority why the
licence should not be suspended or revoked.
(3) Where the licence is varied, suspended or revoked, the
Authority shall give notice to the insurer in a prescribed form.
(4) The Authority shall give reasons for its decision under
subsection (1).
(5) An insurer may within thirty days from the receipt of the
communication of the Authority of the variation, suspension or
revocation of his or her licence, appeal to the Tribunal
(6) Except for purposes of winding up its business no insurer ,
whose licence has been revoked shall carry on insurance business in
Uganda. 
(7) An insurer shall not take on any new insurance business or
renew any existing policy—
43
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) where there is an appeal against a revocation of a licence,
until the appeal is decided in favour of the insurer; or
(b) in case of suspension of a licence, until the suspension is
over.
(8) The Authority shall publish in the  Gazette and a newspaper
widely read by the people in the area where the registered office of
the affected insurer is located, any variation, revocation or suspension
of the licence of the insurer or any reinstatement or relicensing of the
affected  insurer as soon as is practicable.
(9) The provisions of this Act continue to apply to an insurer,
despite the suspension or revocation of its licence.
Other provisions relating to licensing
46. Provisions relating to licences.
(1) Subject to subsection (4), the Authority shall not issue an
insurer’s licence that authorises the holder to carry on both life
insurance and non-life insurance business. 
(2) A reinsurer’s licence shall not be granted to a mutual insurer.
(3) A micro insurance or ganisation licence may authorise the
holder to carry on both life insurance and non-life insurance business.
(4) A licence may be issued subject to such conditions as the
Authority considers appropriate.
PART VI—P RUDENTIAL REGULATION OF INSURERS, HMOS AND
MICRO INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
47. Application. 
(1) This Part applies to insurers, HMOs and micro insurance
organisations unless otherwise stated. 
(2) The Authority may , due to the nature of micro insurance
organisations and the circumstances, modify the provisions of this
Part to better apply to such organisations. 
44
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
48. Capital adequacy and other prudential requirements.
(1) Every insurer shall maintain—
(a) its capital resources at a level adequate to support its
insurance business, taking into account the nature, scale
and complexity of that business and its risk profile;
(b) adequate procedures and controls to monitor and assess its
capital resources and capital on an ongoing basis.
(2) For the purposes of this section, capital resources has the
meaning specified in the regulations made under sub section (3).
(3) The Authority shall, by regulations, determine the capital
adequacy and other prudential requirements for insurers.
49. Technical provisions.
An insurer and a HMO shall establish and maintain the technical
provisions prescribed in regulations made by the Authority under
section 48(3).
50. Investments.
An insurer or a HMO shall comply with such requirements
concerning investments as are specified in regulations made by the
Authority.
51. Maintenance of financial soundness.
Every insurer, HMO and micro insurance organisation shall, at all
times—
(a) maintain its business in a financially sound condition so as
to meet its liabilities;
(b) maintain its capital resources at a level adequate to support
its licensed business, taking into account the nature, scale
and complexity of that business and its risk profile; and
(c) conduct its licensed business in accordance with sound
insurance principles
45
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
52. No reduction in share capital of insurer or HMO.
An insurer or HMO shall not reduce its paid up share capital, or cause
or permit its paid-up share capital to be reduced, without the prior
written consent of the Authority and any resolution passed in
contravention of this section is void and of no effect.
53. Segregated funds.
(1) A life insurer shall establish and maintain segregated funds
as required by the regulations.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), “segregated fund” has the
meaning specified in regulations made under subsection (1).
(3) An insurer that contravenes subsection (1) is liable to a fine
not exceeding one thousand currency points.
54. Restrictions on loans to officers and directors.
(1) An insurer or HMO shall not, without the prior written
approval of the Authority, offer a loan to an officer or director of the
insurer except—
(a) a loan on a life  policy limited to the policy’s surrender
value, where the right to borrow the same amount is also
provided to the policy holders of that class; or
(b) a loan forming part of the terms and conditions of service
of that officer or director, repayable within three years.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the total aggregate of the
loans offer to an of ficer or director of an insurer or HMO shall not
exceed ten percent of the paid up capital of the insurer or HMO.
(3) An insurer or HMO that offers a loan to an officer or director
contrary to subsection (1) or (2) commits an offence and is liable to a
fine double the amount of the loan given.
(4) This section does not apply to a distribution permitted under
this Act.
46
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
55. Prohibition of loans to associate companies.
An insurer, a reinsurer, an insurance broker or a reinsurance broker
shall not grant a loan, directly or indirectly, to a company in which the
directors or officers and employees of that insurer, reinsurer,
insurance broker or reinsurance broker except as permitted by the
Regulations.
56. Other prohibitions applicable to insurers and HMOs.
(1) An insurer or HMO shall not, except in accordance with
regulations made under this Act or the prior written approval of the
Authority—
(a) acquire or deal in its own shares or lend money or make
advances on the security of its own shares;
(b) grant credit on premiums;
(c) grant unsecured credit to any person;
(d) enter into a guarantee or provide a security in connection
with a loan by another person to a related party. 
(2) This section does not apply to a distribution permitted under
this Act.
57. Distributions.
(1) An insurer or a HMO shall not make a distribution to any of
its shareholders unless, immediately after the distribution, the insurer
or HMO complies with the capital adequacy requirements prescribed
by the Authority in the regulations made under section 48(3) and all
other prudential requirements applicable to the insurer or HMO.
(2) A “distribution”, in relation to a distribution by an insurer or
HMO to a member, means—
(a) the direct or indirect transfer of an asset, other than its own
shares, to or for the benefit of the shareholder; or
47
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) the incurring of a debt to or for the benefit of a shareholder
in relation to shares held by the shareholder and whether by
means of the purchase of an asset, the purchase, redemption
or other acquisition of shares, a transfer of indebtedness or
otherwise,  and includes a dividend.
(3) An insurer or HMO that contravenes subsection (1) shall
recover, from its shareholders the dividends paid to them and be liable
to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.
Governance and Management
58. Governance framework.
(1) Every insurer and HMO shall establish and maintain an
appropriate governance and management framework.
(2) Every insurer and HMO shall establish and maintain such
strategies, policies, procedures and controls appropriate for the
nature, scale and complexity of its business and its risk profile and
ensure that they are regularly reviewed and updated. 
(3) The governance and management framework shall provide
for—
(a) the apportionment of roles between shareholders, directors,
senior management and key persons in control functions;
(b) the separation of the oversight function from management
responsibilities; and  
(c) the adequate monitoring of and control of the business and
affairs of the insurer or HMO by the directors and senior
management.
(4) The insurer or HMO shall routinely review the suitability of
the board members, senior management, key persons in control
functions and significant owners.
48
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
59. Board of directors of insurer or HMO.
(1) Every insurer or HMO shall furnish the Authority with the
names and addresses of its board of directors, senior executives and
technical personnel.
(2) A member of the board of directors of an insurer or HMO
shall—
(a) be a fit and proper person as prescribed in Schedule 2;
(b) not at the same time serve as a member of the board of
directors of another insurer or HMO of an insurance
brokerage company in Uganda without the prior written
approval of the Authority; and 
(c) have sufficient time and commitment to undertake his or
her duties diligently.
(3) Every insurer or HMO shall ensure that the board of directors
is adequately resourced and that the board of directors has suf ficient
powers—
(a) to obtain, in a timely manner, such information as the board
of directors requires to undertake its functions; and
(b) to assess senior management, key persons in control
functions and other relevant persons.
(4) The board of directors of an insurer or a HMO is responsibile
for the business and affairs of the insurer or HMO and for ensuring its
effective organisation.
60. Senior management.
(1) Every member of the senior management of an insurer or a
HMO shall meet the fit and proper criteria prescribed in Schedule 2.   
49
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) The senior management of an insurer or HMO shall be
responsible for the day to day operations of the insurer or HMO and
provide the board of directors with timely and accurate information
with recommendations for its review and approval. 
61. Control functions.
(1) Every insurer shall establish and maintain the following
control functions—
(a) a risk management function;
(b) a compliance function;
(c) an actuarial function;
(d) an internal audit function;
(e) such other control functions as may be specified in
regulations made under this Act; and
(f) such other functions as the insurer may consider
appropriate for the nature, scale and complexity of its
insurance business.
(2) Every HMO shall establish and maintain the following
control functions—
(a) a risk management function;
(b) actuarial function; 
(c) a compliance function;
(d) internal audit function.
(3) Every insurer and HMO shall— 
(a) ensure that each control function is provided with the
authority, independence and resources required to enable it
to operate effectively; and
(b) appoint an individual to—
50
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(i) undertake the responsibilities of each control
function; or
(ii) where the responsibilities of the control function are
to be undertaken by more than one employee or to be
outsourced, have overall responsibility for, and
oversight of, the control function.
62. Risk management.
(1) Every insurer or HMO shall establish and maintain—
(a) a clearly defined strategy and policies for the effective
management of all significant risks to which the insurer or
HMO is or may be exposed; and 
(b) procedures and controls that are sufficient to ensure that the
risk management strategy and policies are ef fectively
implemented.
(2) The risk management strategy and policies shall— 
(a) be appropriate for the nature, scale and complexity of the
licensed business; 
(b) specify how risks are to be identified, monitored, managed
and reported on in a timely manner; 
(c) take into account the probability , potential impact and the
time duration of risk; 
(d) provide for the effective identification and management of
insurance risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk,
operational risk, reputational risk and such other risks as
the Authority may, by regulations, determine.
51
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Premiums and other related matters 
63. Payment of premium.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the insured shall pay in full the
premiums payable under the insurance contract on or before the date
of inception of the policy or renewal of the policy.
(2) The Authority may by regulations provide for the payment of
premiums in any other manner.
64. Approval of premium and commission rates. 
(1) An insurer or HMO shall not issue any policy of insurance if
the premium rates and commission rates contravene any regulations
made by the Authority under subsection (2).
(2) The Authority may prescribe minimum premium or
maximum commission rates for any class or type of insurance
business.
65. Approval of policy format forms and other matters.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an insurer or HMO shall not issue
the text or format of the policy or the proposal form unless such have
been approved by the Authority as suitable for the purpose of the
insurance business it is meant for.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), where the Authority approves the
text or format of a policy or proposal form under subsection (1), an
insurer or HMO shall not make any amendment to the policy or
proposal form without the prior written approval of the Authority .
(3)Where the Authority does not approve or reject the text or
format of a policy or proposal form, or an amendment in the text or
format within the prescribed period, the insurer shall treat the text or
format of the policy or the proposal form or amendment as approved.
52
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
66. Alteration of approved premium rates without approval.
(1) Where an insurer lowers the approved premium rates without
the approval of the Authority, the Authority may order the
cancellation of the policy issued under the altered premium rates, and
a pro-rata refund of the premium in respect of the unexpired period of
the risk shall be paid to the insured.
(2) Where an insurer lowers the approved premium rates without
the approval of the Authority, the Authority may require the company
to offer adequate refund to the insured.
PART VII—R EINSURANCE BUSINESS
67. Reinsurance arrangements.
(1) A licensed direct insurer, HMO and a micro insurance
organisation shall have such arrangements as it considers appropriate
for the reinsurance of risks under insurance contracts that it has
entered into in the course of its business as an insurer or a micro
insurance organisation.
(2) A licensed direct insurer, HMO and a Micro insurance
organisation shall not, without the prior written authorisation of the
Authority under subsection (3), enter into a reinsurance contract, as
cedant, other than—
(a) with a licensed reinsurer;
(b) with a qualifying foreign reinsurer; or
(c) in accordance with such arrangements, as may be specified
in the Regulations.
(3) The Authority may , on the application of a licensed direct
insurer, HMO or a micro insurance organisation, authorise the
insurer, HMO or micro insurance or ganization to enter into a
reinsurance contract, as cedant, with—
53
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) a foreign direct insurer; or
(b) a foreign reinsurer that is not a qualifying foreign reinsurer.
(4) The Regulations may specify requirements in relation to the
reinsurance arrangements of licensed direct insurers, HMO and micro
insurance organizations and the retrocession arrangements of licensed
reinsurers, including by—
(a) requiring—
(i) licensed direct insurers, HMO and micro insurance
organisations to provide the Authority with prior
written notice of their reinsurance arrangements;
(ii) licensed reinsurers to provide the Authority with
prior written notice of their retrocession
arrangements; and
(iii) the approval of the Authority with respect to certain
specified reinsurance or retrocession contracts or
arrangements;
(b) imposing restrictions on the reinsurance or retrocession of
risks with foreign insurers; and
(c) specifying requirements in relation to the reinsurance
arrangements of licensed direct insurers and micro
insurance organisations and the retrocession arrangements
of licensed reinsurers.
68. Modification or cancellation in insurer’s net retention.
(1) An insurer or HMO shall inform the Authority within five
working days of any modification or cancellation in the amount of its
net retention in all classes of business which it undertakes.
54
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) Where the Authority considers the retention submitted under
subsection (1) not to be in accordance with the financial standing of
the insurer or HMO, it may request an explanation of the technical or
other reasons for establishing these retentions; and on the basis of the
explanation the Authority may order the adjustment of the net
retention.
69. Annual reinsurance returns.
An insurer and a reinsurance company licensed under this Act shall
within ninety days from the end of the calendar year submit to the
Authority in a prescribed form, details of the reinsurance or
retrocession returns and details of the reinsurers or retrocessionaires
with whom they maintain business relations in respect of risks falling
within the scope of this Act.
70. Prohibition of contracts with certain reinsurance companies.
The Authority may—
(a) after receiving reliable information that a reinsurance
company—
(i) cannot meet the reinsurance claims;
(ii) has doubtful integrity in its business dealings; or
(b) for any other reasonable cause, 
prohibit insurance companies and reinsurance companies under this
Act from entering into reinsurance contracts with that company .
71. Modifications wher e terms of r einsurance document not
favourable.
The Authority, may after the scrutiny of a proposed reinsurance
contract, direct an insurer, in writing—
(a) not to enter into or renew the contract unless specified
modifications are made to the terms and conditions of the
contract;
55
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) not to renew the contract, if the terms and conditions of the
contract are not favourable to the insurer or are not in the
interest of the economy of Uganda or the insurance industry
or are not in the public interest.
72. Negotiations not to be in personal capacity.
An insurance agent, director, administrator, employee or shareholder
of an insurance company shall not negotiate or intervene in the
placement of reinsurance in his or her personal capacity.
73. Foreign reinsurers’ representatives.
(1) A foreign reinsurer may, with the approval of the Authority,
appoint a reinsurance broker or reinsurer licensed under this Act to be
its representative in Uganda for purposes of accepting reinsurance
business on its behalf.
(2) The Authority may on granting the approval under
subsection (1) attach such conditions as it may deem necessary.
(3) Where approval of the Authority is granted under this
section, the foreign reinsurer shall establish and maintain at the
central bank a security deposit equivalent to five hundred currency
points. 
74. Mandatory reinsurance placements with international and
national organisations.
(1) An insurer or reinsurer licensed under this Act shall of fer to
place with—
(a) the African Reinsurance Corporation (Africa-Re), a
minimum of 5 percent of its reinsurance cessions, under
article 27 of the Agreement that established Africa-Re; 
(b) the Preferential Trade Area Reinsurance Company (ZEP-
RE) a minimum of 10 percent of its reinsurance cessions,
under articles 20 and 21 of the Agreement that established
ZEP-RE;  
56
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) Uganda Re, a minimum of fifteen percent of its reinsurance
of its treaty and facultative cessions.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not affect the right of
Africa-Re, ZEP-RE or the reinsurance company incorporated under
subsection (1) (c), to accept or decline all or any part of the minimum
reinsurance cessions offered or placed by any insurer or reinsurer.
(3) An insurer or reinsurer who fails to comply with subsection
(1) is liable to a fine to be prescribed in Regulations.
(4) Subject to the relevant agreements respectively, the Authority
may vary the minimum reinsurance cessions under subsection (1). 
(5) The shareholding of the national reinsurance company and
any changes to the shareholding shall be approved by the Authority .
(6) An insurer shall first place reinsurance business with an
organisation or company mentioned in subsection (1) or an insurance
company licensed under the Act, to the maximum extent possible,
before placement of the business outside Uganda.
PART VIII—A MALGAMATIONS AND TRANSFERS
75. Restrictions on amalgamations and transfers.
(1) An insurer or HMO shall not, without the prior written
approval of the Authority—
(a) transfer its insurance business, or any part of its insurance
business, to another insurer;
(b) accept a transfer of the insurance business of another
insurer, or any part of that business; or
(c) amalgamate its insurance business, or any part of its
insurance business, with the business of another insurer. 
57
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A transaction contrary to subsection (1) is void where the
transaction has the effect of—
(a) amalgamating the business, or part of the business, of the
insurer with the business of another insurer; or
(b) transferring a part of the business of the insurer to another
insurer.
(3) An insurer that contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency
points.
76. Application for amalgamation or transfer.
(1) Where two or more insurers intend to amalgamate or transfer
insurance business of any class from one to another—
(a) both insurers wishing to amalgamate, jointly; or
(b) the insurer wishing to transfer business to another insurer, 
shall apply to the Authority for approval of the amalgamation or
transfer, as the case may be.
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be accompanied
by—
(a) the document under which the proposed amalgamation or
transfer is to take effect;
(b) the audited accounts and balance sheets of each insurer
intending to amalgamate or effect a transfer; and
(c) any other report or document on which the proposed
amalgamation or transfer is based.
58
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) Where the amalgamation or transfer is in respect of life
insurance business, in addition to the requirements under subsection
(2), the application shall be accompanied by a report of the likely
effect of the amalgamation or transfer to the policyholders, prepared
by an actuary approved by the Authority.
77. Notice of amalgamation or transfer.
(1) The parties intending to amalgamate or effect a transfer shall
before making the application—
(a) publish a notice of the proposed amalgamation or transfer
in the Gazette and at least one English language newspaper
published in Uganda;
(b) send a notice of the application to all policyholders and
claimants of the parties;
(c) make available for inspection at the principal offices of the
parties a statement detailing the particulars of the
amalgamation or transfer , including, in the case of life
insurance business, the actuarial report for at least thirty
days.
(2) The notice referred to under subsection (1) shall invite any
person who has reasonable ground to believe that he or she would be
adversely affected by the amalgamation or transfer to make written
representation to the Authority stating reasons, within thirty days
from the last day of publication.
78. Conditions for approval of transfer of life insurance. 
(1) The Authority shall not approve an application for a transfer
of life insurance business unless the transaction involves the transfer
of assets relating to the life insurance business proposed to be
transferred in accordance with this section.
59
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) Where the transfer covers all life insurance business of the
transferor, all assets representing the life fund maintained by the
transferor shall be transferred.
(3) Where the transfer applies to a part of the life insurance
business of the transferor, the approved proportion of the assets
representing the statutory fund maintained by the transferor shall be
transferred.
79. Decision of the Authority on amalgamation or transfer.
(1) The Authority may, after considering an application for
amalgamation or transfer, approve or refuse the proposal for
amalgamation or transfer subject to terms and conditions it may
consider necessary.
(2) The Authority shall make its decision under subsection (1)
within six months from the date of publication, and if no
communication is received by the parties within that period, the
parties shall effect the amalgamation or transfer.
(3) After a decision is made under subsection (1), the Authority
shall—
(a) publish its decision in the Gazette and in one English
language newspaper published in Uganda; and
(b) send a copy of its decision to the parties to the
amalgamation or transfer and any person who made a
representation.
(4) Where the Authority refuses an amalgamation or transfer, it
shall, in writing, give reasons for the refusal to the parties.
(5) A person aggrieved by a decision under this section may
appeal to the Tribunal within thirty days from the date on which the
notice of the decision is received by the T ribunal, and the T ribunal
shall make the decision within thirty days from the date of the appeal.
60
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(6) For purposes of subsection (5), notice shall be deemed to
have been received within seven days from—
(a) the date of the notice to the aggrieved person; or
(b) the date of the publication of the notice in the Gazette and
the newspaper, whichever is the later.
80. Effect of approval of amalgamation or transfer.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an instrument giving effect to an
amalgamation or transfer approved by the Authority shall be effective
in law—
(a) to transfer to the amalgamated insurer or transferee all the
transferor ’s rights and obligations under the policies
included in the instruments; or
(b) if the instrument so provides, to secure the continuation by
or against the amalgamated insurer or the transferee of any
legal proceedings by or against either party to the
amalgamation or against the transferor which relate to those
rights or obligations, 
notwithstanding the absence of any agreement or consent which
would otherwise be necessary for it to be effective in law for those
purposes.
(2) Except where the Authority directs otherwise, a policyholder
whose policy is part of the approved amalgamation or transfer shall
not be bound by the instrument approving the amalgamation or
transfer unless he or she has been given written notice of its execution
by either of the insurers involved.
(3) Where an amalgamation or transfer has been approved, the
amalgamated insurer or the transferee insurer shall, within ten days
from the date of completion of the amalgamation or transfer, deposit
with the Authority certified copies of—
61
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) statements of the respective assets and liabilities; and
(b) the documents under which the amalgamation or transfer
was effected.
81. Application of provisions on amalgamation and transfer to
HMOs.
This Part, with the necessary modifications, applies to amalgamations
and transfers of HMOs, insurance brokers and reinsurance brokers.  
PART IX—S PECIAL PROVISIONS ON INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES AND
BANCASSURANCE
Unlicensed insurance intermediary business 
82. Prohibition on unlicensed insurance intermediary business. 
(1) Subject to subsection (3), a person shall not carry on, or
purport to carry on, business as an insurance intermediary unless the
person holds a valid insurance intermediary licence issued by the
Authority. 
(2) Without limiting the application of subsection (1)—
(a) a person is considered to carry on business as an insurance
intermediary if, by way of business, the person offers to act
as an insurance intermediary for a person in Uganda
directly or indirectly;
(b) a person purports to carry on business as an insurance
intermediary if that person uses any name, style,
designation, description, title or trademark that represents
or implies that the person is an insurance intermediary.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to— 
(a) a foreign reinsurance broker that acts for, or in relation to,
contracts involving a reinsurer; or
(b) a person authorised to carry out bancassurance under this
Act who acts as the insurance agent of an insurer.
62
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(4) The Authority may, by regulations, grant an exemption to a
person incorporated outside Uganda to provide any insurance
intermediary services where the Authority is satisfied that those
services cannot be obtained in Uganda or cannot be obtained on
equivalent terms.
(5) A foreign insurance intermediary shall not occupy or operate
an office in Uganda without the prior written approval of the
Authority. 
(6) A person who carries on or purports to carry on business as
an insurance intermediary contrary to subsection (1) is liable to a fine
not exceeding two thousand currency points. 
(7) A foreign insurance intermediary that contravenes this
section is liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand currency points.
Categories of intermediary licences and application for a licence
83. Insurance intermediary licences.
(1) A licence to carry on business as an insurance intermediary
may be issued by the Authority in one of the following categories—
(a) an insurance brokers licence, which authorises the holder to
carry on business as an insurance broker;
(b) a reinsurance brokers licence, which authorises the holder
to carry on business as a reinsurance broker;
(c) an insurance agents licence, which authorises the holder to
act as an insurance agent; 
(d) a micro insurance agents licence, which authorises the
holder to act as an insurance agent in respect of micro
insurance contracts only;
(e) an insurance risk advisors licence, which authorises the
holder to carry on business as an insurance risk advisor;
63
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(f) a loss assessors licence, which authorises the holder to
carry on business as a loss assessor; 
(g) a loss adjustors licence, which authorizes the holder to
carry on the business of loss adjustor.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, an insurance brokers licence and
a reinsurance brokers licence authorises the holder to assess and
advise on insurable risks, without the need to obtain an insurance risk
advisors licence.
(3) A person shall not use the name of insurance broker or agent,
risk manager, loss assessor or adjuster, insurance surveyor or claims
settling agent or any other name of a category of insurance
intermediary unless he or she is licensed to carry on that business.
84. Insurance or reinsurance brokers to be bodies corporate. 
No person other than a company incorporated under the Companies
Act, 2012 shall carry on business as an insurance or reinsurance
broker.
85. Application and qualifications for insurance intermediary
licence.
(1) An application for an insurance intermediary licence or
renewal of a licence shall be in a form prescribed by the Authority . 
(2) The qualifications for obtaining an intermediary licence shall
be prescribed by the Authority.
(3) The Authority shall not grant a licence or renew an insurance
intermediary’s licence if the applicant is not a fit and proper person
within the meaning of Schedule 2 to the Act.
(4) Where the Authority is satisfied that—
(a) the financial standing of the applicant is sound;
64
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) the knowledge, skill and experience of the principal officer
are adequate;
(c) in the case of a broker, the professional indemnity policy of
insurance is satisfactory;
(d) the applicant is not disqualified under this Act;
(e) the applicant is and is likely to continue to be able to
comply with the provisions of this Act and the regulations
and directions made or issued under this Act as are
applicable to the applicant;
(f) the prescribed fee has been paid, 
the Authority may, subject to terms and conditions that it considers
necessary, issue a licence to or renew a licence of an applicant.
(5) A licence shall be issued for two years and may be renewed
for two years on each renewal.
(6) Every insurance intermediary shall establish and maintain a risk
management function and a compliance function.
86. Processing and granting of a licence.
Sections 41, 42, 43, 44 and 45 shall, with the necessary modifications,
apply to insurance intermediaries.
87. Restrictions applicable to insurance intermediaries.
(1) The following persons do not qualify to be insurance
agents—
(a) public officers or employees of local governments;
(b) administrators, managers, directors, auditors or employees
of insurers or reinsurers, or insurance brokers or
reinsurance brokers, risk advisors or loss assessors; or
65
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) a person who is not fit and proper.
(2) An insurance agent shall not act for two or more insurers
transacting the same class of insurance business without the written
approval of the Authority.
(3) An insurance agent shall not act as agent for a reinsurer or
undertake any activity that constitutes the business of an insurance
broker, a risk advisor or a loss assessor. 
(4) For avoidance of doubt, an insurance agent may act for one
insurer transacting life business and one insurer transacting non-life
business but not for two or more insurers transacting the same class
of business.
(5) An insurance broker and a reinsurance broker shall not
undertake any activity that constitutes the business of a loss assessor.
(6) A person holding any interest in an insurer shall not be a
substantial shareholder of an insurance intermediary unless permitted
by the Authority in writing. 
88. Application of sections 58, 59 and 60.
Sections 58, 59 and 60 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply
to an insurance intermediary which is not a natural person. 
89. Paid-up capital and pr ofessional indemnity for insurance
broker or reinsurance brokers. 
(1) Every insurance broker or reinsurance broker shall not carry
on the business of insurance broking unless it maintains at all times
while carrying on that business, a paid-up capital as stipulated in the
regulations and shall furnish the Authority with proof of registration
of the Authority’s lien on the deposit.
66
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) The deposits made under subsection (1) shall be considered
part of the assets in respect of the capital of the insurance broker or
reinsurance broker.
(3) The deposits made under subsection (1) shall be invested by
the insurance broker or reinsurance broker in Government securities
or in any other investments as may be approved by Authority, and on
which the Authority shall have a lien.
(4) The security deposits made under subsection (1) shall be
available to the insurance broker or reinsurance broker in accordance
with section 39 with the necessary modifications.
(5) Any income that may accrue from the security deposit shall
be payable to the insurance broking company that makes the security
deposit. 
(6) Every insurance intermediary , except an insurance agent,
shall not carry on the business unless the insurance intermediary
maintains at all times while carrying on that business a professional
indemnity policy of not less than the equivalent of one hundred
million shillings. 
(7) The paid-up capital, the security deposit or the professional
indemnity policy provided under this section may, by regulations, be
amended.
90. Premiums and other monies to be paid to insur er or HMOs
directly
(1) An insurance broker or insurance agent shall not accept a
cheque or other payable order from a policy holder or prospective
policy holder in respect of premiums or other monies, paid for or on
account of an insurer or HMO in connection with an insurance
contract or a proposed insurance contract unless the cheque or
payable order is made payable to the insurer or HMO.
67
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) An insurance broker or insurance agent shall not request or
authorise the electronic transfer of monies into any of its accounts,
including a client account, if those monies are paid for or on account
of an insurer in connection with an insurance contract or a proposed
insurance contract. 
(3) An insurance broker or an insurance agent who receives any
premiums whether in full or installments or other monies in cash,
shall immediately but not later than the next working day from the
date of receipt, without any deductions of commissions or otherwise
remit the premiums or money in cash to the insurer.
(4) Any cash premiums or other monies received by an insurance
broker or insurance agent shall not be treated, for any purposes as assets
or property of the insurance broker or insurance agent.
(5) The insurance broker or insurance agent who does not
immediately remit the premium or other monies shall be liable to pay
the premium or other monies due and interest on the premium or other
monies to the insurer and a penalty to the Authority at rates
determined by the Authority.
(6) An insurance agent or insurance broker shall deal with any
premiums or other monies received under this section in accordance
with instructions of the insurer.
(7) An insurance broker or agent who contravenes this section is
liable to fine of not less than  five hundred currency points.
91. Loans to agents.
An insurance agent shall not, without the prior approval of the
Authority, have at any time, a loan outstanding to an insurer, which is
in the excess of an aggregate of one hundred currency points.
92. Portfolio transfer.
(1) An insurance intermediary may transfer his or her portfolio
to another intermediary, provided that prior approval is obtained from
the Authority.
68
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) The Authority shall not approve a transfer unless it is
satisfied that the transferor has settled all financial obligations with
all insurers with which there are dealings, prior to the transfer and has
provided the Authority all the information the Authority may require.
(3) A portfolio shall be transferred in its entirety unless the
Authority directs otherwise.
(4) Where a transfer is approved, the parties to the transfer shall
inform all the policyholders and the insurers with which they place
business of the transaction.
(5) Where a transfer or sale is effected without the approval of
the Authority, the Authority may suspend or revoke the licence of a
transferee or seller of a portfolio, and that person shall be prohibited
from obtaining another licence for five years from the date of sale or
transfer in case of revocation.
93. Direct relationship with an insurer.
The appointment of an insurance agent by a person does not preclude
that person or a beneficiary under the policy from having direct
communication with the insurer or vice versa.
94. Loss adjustors and loss assessors.
(1) A loss adjustor or loss assessor shall not accept the receipt of
and shall not handle any monies representing premiums or any other
monies payable to an insurer or to a policyholder under an insurance
contract or prospective insurance contract.
(2) A loss adjustor or loss assessor that contravenes this section
is liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points.
95. Variation, revocation or suspension of an intermediary’s
licence.
(1) The Authority—
69
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) may vary, revoke or suspend a licence of an intermediary
on any ground on which it could have refused to grant the
licence;
(b) shall vary, suspend or revoke the licence of an intermediary
that fails to satisfy the paid- up capital and security deposit
requirements.
(2) The Authority may impose fines, vary, suspend a licence or
revoke a licence of any intermediary, depending on the gravity of the
offence where—
(a) there is breach of professional etiquette;
(b) discounts are given which are not provided for under the
authorised premium rates;
(c) the whole or part of the intermediary’s commission is
offered to an insured;
(d) terms and conditions are offered which are not included in
the policies and endorsements;
(e) quotations are given in the intermediary’s own name
without the authority of the insurers;
(f) monies received in payment of a premium are used for an
intermediary’s own benefit or the benefit of third parties, or
have not been paid to the insurer in accordance with this
Act;
(g) the intermediary ceases to carry on business;
(h) the prescribed fees payable to the Authority remain unpaid;
(i) the intermediary is adjudged to be bankrupt by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
70
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) Before varying, revoking or suspending any licence, the
Authority shall give notice in writing to the person concerned stating
the reasons for the proposed variation, revocation or suspension and
shall afford the person an opportunity to be heard.
(4) Before invoking the provisions of subsection (2), the
Authority shall give written warning for a period to be specified by
regulations made under this Act.
(5) A person aggrieved by any decision made under this section,
may within thirty days from the receipt of the communication of the
decision from the Authority, appeal to the Tribunal.
(6) Where in the interest of the policyholders circumstances
warrant immediate action, the Authority may vary, revoke or suspend
a licence without giving any notice to the person concerned.
(7) Notice of the revocation of the licence shall be advertised by
the Authority in the Gazette and an English language daily newspaper
widely read by people where the affected intermediary has an office.
Bancassurance
96. Prohibition on unauthorised bancassurance.
(1) A financial institution shall not carry on bancassurance
without bancassurance authorisation issued under this Act.
(2) A financial institution that carries on bancassurance contrary
to subsection (1), is liable to a default fine not exceeding ten thousand
currency points.
97. Application for bancassurance authorisation 
An application by a financial institution for bancassurance
authorisation or renewal of bancassurance authorisation shall be in a
form prescribed by the Authority. 
71
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
98. Revocation of authorisation to undertake bancassurance.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Authority— 
(a) shall revoke an authorisation to undertake bancassurance if—
(i) the financial institution ceases to hold a licence under
the Financial Institutions Act, 2004; or
(ii) the central bank requests the Authority to revoke the
authorisation; and
(b) shall revoke an authorisation to undertake bancassurance if
the financial institution—
(i) has applied to the Authority in writing for the
revocation of its authorisation; or 
(ii) contravenes, or has contravened, the conduct of
business requirements applicable to it in this Act or
any regulations made under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall, before revoking an authorisation under
subsection (1)(b)(ii), give the financial institution written notice of its
intention to revoke the licence, stating  the grounds upon which it
intends to revoke the authorisation.
(3) The Authority may , in exceptional circumstances where it
considers the interests of the policyholders to be at risk, revoke the
authorisation without notice.
(4) The Authority shall provide written reasons for the
revocation of an authorisation under this section. 
PART X—S IGNIFICANT CHANGES IN CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
AND CONSTITUTING INSTRUMENTS
99. Application of this Part.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, and subject to subsections (2)
and (3), this Part applies to all licensees.  
72
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) Micro insurance organisations and insurance agents may, by
statutory instrument be exempted from the application of this Part.
(3) This Part does not apply to insurance agents that are
individuals or financial institutions that have been granted
bancassurance authorisation. 
100. Changes in control of licensee.
(1) A person shall not become a significant owner of a licensee,
except with the prior written approval of the Authority.
(2) A person who is a significant owner of a licensee shall not,
except with the prior written approval of the Authority—
(a) significantly increase or reduce the person’ s control over
the licensee; or
(b) cease to be a substantial shareholder of the licensee. 
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) (a), regulations made
under this Act shall specify the circumstances under which an
increase or reduction in a person’s control is significant.
(4) A licensee shall not cause, permit or acquiesce in any dealing
with its shares that would result in a person contravening subsection
(1) or (2).
(5) A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not
exceeding five hundred currency points.
101. Authority’s powers concerning significant owners.
(1) The Authority may issue a directive under subsection (3)
to—
(a) a person who becomes a significant owner in, or acquires
increased control over, a licensee without obtaining the
Authority’s prior written approval; or 
73
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) a person who is a significant owner of a licensee if the
Authority has reasonable grounds for believing that—
(i) the person does not satisfy its fit and proper criteria;
or 
(ii) by virtue of the person’s significant ownership in, or
control over, the licensee, any of the factors specified
in subsection (2) apply. 
(2) The factors referred to in subsection (1)(b)(ii) are that the
licensee’s ownership structure—
(a) is not appropriate having regard to the nature, scale and
complexity of its licensed business; 
(b) adversely affects its financial soundness or the ability of the
Authority to supervise it; or 
(c) is prejudicial to its customers. 
(3) If any of the circumstances specified in subsection (1) apply,
the Authority may issue a directive to the person—
(a) requiring the person to dispose of the person’s interest in
the licensee, in whole or in part, within such time period as
is specified in the notice; or 
(b) prohibiting the person from exercising any rights, including
voting rights, attached to the interest. 
(4) Where the Authority issues a directive under subsection
(3)(a) to a person, it may direct that during the period before the
person’s interest is disposed of, the person is prohibited from
exercising any rights, including voting rights and the rights to receive
a distribution, attached to the interest. 
(5) Sections 106, 108 and 111 apply in relation to any disposal
to be made in compliance with a directive issued under subsection
74
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(1). 
(6) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply
with the requirements of a directive issued under this section commits
an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one
thousand currency points. 
102. Authority to regulate significant owners.
The Authority may make regulations for the better regulation of
significant owners of licensees. 
103. Changes in directors, senior management and key persons in
control functions.
(1) A licensee shall not appoint a director, senior manager or key
person in a control function who is not fit and proper and without
obtaining the prior written approval of the Authority.
(2) A licensee shall, within ten working days, after a senior
manager or key person in a control function takes up of fice or ceases
to hold office with, or be employed by, or act for, the licensee, notify
the Authority. 
(3) The notice under subsection (2) shall include a statement of
the reasons for the director, senior manager or key person in a control
function ceasing to hold of fice with, be employed by or act for the
licensee. 
104. Authority’ s powers concerning management and key
persons in control functions.
(1) Where the Authority has reasonable grounds to believe that
a person specified in subsection (2) does not satisfy the fit and proper
criteria, the Authority shall, by written notice direct the licensee to—
(a) remove that person and replace the person with another
person acceptable to the Authority; 
(b) ensure that the person ceases to undertake certain specified
functions in relation to the licensee;
75
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) take such remedial action in relation to that person as the
Authority specifies;
(d) a person undertaking any function for a licensee specified
by regulations for the purpose of this section.
(2) The following persons are specified for the purposes of
subsection (1)—
(a) a director of a licensee;
(b) a senior manager of a licensee; 
(c) a key person in a control function of a licensee; and
(d) a person undertaking any function for a licensee specified
by the Minister, by regulations for the purpose of this
section.
(3) A notice issued under subsection (1)—
(a) shall state whether the specified requirements have
immediate effect or state the time period within which they
shall be complied with; 
(b) may include directions consequential upon, or ancillary to,
the requirements specified in the notice; and
(c) may direct that, in the case of a person who it has removed,
the person should not be reappointed, or accept
reappointment, to the same position, or to any specified
position, within the insurance industry, at any time, or a
period specified by the Authority , or until conditions
specified by the Authority have been met. 
(4) Subsection (1) has effect notwithstanding any agreement,
contract of employment, written law or rule of law or any provision
in the licensee’s constituting documents relating to the person.
76
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(5) Where a licensee becomes aware of any information that is
reasonably material to the Authority’s fit and proper assessment of
the person concerned, the licensee shall notify the Authority as soon
as is reasonably practicable. 
(6) A licensee that contravenes subsection (5) commits an
offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency
points.
105. Information to be furnished by an insurer or HMO.
(1) An insurer or HMO shall prepare and cause to be submitted
to the Authority an audited balance sheet within three months after
the end of its financial year.
(2) An insurer or HMO shall exhibit throughout the year, in a
conspicuous place in each of its of fices and branches, and shall
publish in a local newspaper of wide circulation within four months
after the end of its financial year the following—
(a) a copy of the Auditors Report;
(b) a statement of financial position clearly indicating the
names and signatories of the Directors;
(c) a statement of comprehensive income;
(d) the companies own statement of comprehensive income
and financial position before consolidating its performance
with other sister companies;
(e) solvency ratios, claims ratios and management expense
ratios for the current and previous year. 
PART XI—F INANCIAL RECORDS AND STATEMENTS, FINANCIAL
REPORTING, AUDIT AND ACTUARIAL REQUIREMENTS
106. Maintenance of financial records.
(1) Every licensee shall keep, at its principal office in Uganda,
records sufficient—
77
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) to show and explain its transactions;
(b) to enable its financial position to be determined with
reasonable accuracy, at any time;
(c) to enable it to prepare financial statements and make
returns as it may be required to prepare and make under this
Act; and
(d) where applicable, to enable its financial statements to be
audited in accordance with this Act. 
(2) A licensee shall retain the records required to be kept under
this section for a period of at least ten years after the end of the
financial year to which they relate.
(3) Subsection (2) applies to a former licensee. 
(4) A licensee that contravenes subsection (1) or (2) or a former
licensee that contravenes subsection (3) is liable to a fine not
exceeding one thousand currency points.
107. Preparation of financial statements. 
(1) This section applies to an insurer, an insurance broker, a
reinsurance broker, HMO, loss adjustor, risk advisor, and a loss
assessor.
(2) The financial year of every licensee is the period of twelve
months beginning on the 1st day of January in each year and ending
on the 31st day of December in the same year .
(3) A licensee shall prepare financial statements for each
financial year in accordance with the international financial reporting
standards as adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants
in Uganda.
78
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
108. Auditing of accounts and auditors.
(1) The accounts of every licensee shall be audited annually by
an auditor approved by the Authority. 
(2) Where the Auditor General audits the accounts, the
Authority’s approval shall not be required.
(3) The auditor shall—
(a) not be an employee, manager, director or shareholder of the
licensee;
(b) maintain a professional indemnity policy, as may be
determined by the Authority;
(c) be an accounting firm or practicing accountant licensed by
the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda;
(d) audit the accounts of the licensee in an independent and
impartial manner;
(e) ensure that an audit is conducted in accordance with
international standards on auditing as adopted by the
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.
(4) The auditor shall satisfy himself or herself that the accounts
of the licensee have been properly prepared in accordance with the
books and records of the licensee.
(5) The auditor shall certify whether—
(a) he or she has obtained adequate information from the books
and records of the licensee;
(b) the accounts of the licensee are in accordance with the
information given to him or her by the licensee for the
purposes of the audit;
79
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) the financial statements are in accordance with the
provisions of this Act; and
(d) the financial statements of the licensee give a true and fair
view of the licensees financial position and profit or loss.
(6) A person shall not act as the auditor of a licensee for a
continuous period of more than four years and after that period that
auditor is not eligible for appointment as auditor in any of the
proceeding four years. 
109. Audit and audit report.
(1) A licensee to which section 107 applies shall make
arrangements as are necessary to enable its auditor to audit its
financial statements in accordance with this Act including—
(a) giving the auditor a right of access at all reasonable times
to its financial records and to all relevant documents and
records; and
(b) providing the auditor with the information and explanations
that is required by the auditor for the purposes of the audit.
(2) An auditor shall carry out suf ficient investigation to enable
the auditor to form an opinion on the financial statements, and
prepare an audit report, in compliance with this Act.
(3) The auditor is entitled to require from a director or an
employee of the licensee, information and explanations as the auditor
thinks necessary for the performance of the duties of the auditor.
(4) Upon completion of the audit of the financial statements of a
licensee, the auditor shall provide a management letter and an audit
report to the licensee. 
80
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Financial statements
110. Financial statements.
(1) Every licensee shall prepare and submit to the Authority,
within three months from the end of each financial year in a
prescribed form, annual reports containing—
(a) prescribed particulars relating to all financial transactions
undertaken by it during that year including, where
applicable, a directors certificate, financial condition
report;
(b) a certified true copy of its financial statements, an auditor’s
certificate and any reports presented to shareholders;
(c) returns that shall be in the prescribed form in the
regulations;
(d) the auditor’s report;
(e) any report on the af fairs of the licensee made to its
shareholders in respect of the financial year;
(f) details of commission scales and incentive plans, bonuses
or other incentives; 
(g) a statement detailing premiums which remain unpaid by the
insured; and
(h) any other information that the Authority may require as
may be specified in the Regulations. 
(2) A licensee shall, in respect of and within such periods as may
be specified in regulations made under this Act, submit to the
Authority—
(a) periodic financial statements, that may be unaudited; 
(b) a return in the form approved by the Authority, if any; and 
81
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) such other information and documentation as may be
specified in the regulations.
(3) Every intermediary to which section 107 applies shall, in
accordance with international financial reporting standards adopted
by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda, keep
proper books and submit to the Authority such annual and periodic
returns and documents as the Authority may, by regulations, require
to be submitted to it within the time period specified in the
regulations. 
(4) Where the Authority considers that financial statements or
documents submitted by a licensee under this section are inaccurate
or incomplete or that they are not prepared in accordance with
accounting standards, the Authority may reject the financial
statements or documents.
(5) Where the Authority rejects financial statements or
documents under subsection (4), the Authority shall issue appropriate
directives to the licensee to rectify the inaccuracy or incompleteness
and resubmit the financial statements or documents, and if the
licensee does not comply with the directive, the Authority may amend
the financial statements or documents at the cost of the licensee. 
111. Group financial statements.
(1) Where a licensee is a member of a group of companies, the
Authority may require the licensee to submit group financial
statements.
(2) The Authority may require that the group financial
statements are audited by the auditor of the licensee or by an auditor
authorised by the Institute of certified Public Accountants of Uganda
and approved by the Authority in writing.
82
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
112. Powers of Authority in relation to financial statements and
other reports. 
(1) The Authority may at any time direct a licensee to supply the
Authority with a report, prepared by its auditor or such other person
as may be nominated by the Authority, on such matters as the
Authority may determine.
(2) A report prepared under subsection (1) shall be at the cost of
the licensee.
(3) Where the Authority is of the opinion that the auditor of a
licensee has failed to fulfil his or her obligations under this Act or no
longer meets the criteria for which he or she was approved as an
auditor, the Authority may revoke the appointment of the auditor.
(4) Before the Authority revokes the appointment of an auditor
under subsection (3), the Authority shall, in writing, give the auditor
the grounds upon which the revocation is to be made and require the
auditor to make written representations on those grounds.  
(5) Where a licensee fails to appoint an auditor in accordance
with this Act, the Authority may appoint a qualified person to act as
the auditor of the licensee.
(6) An auditor appointed under subsection (5) is considered, for
the purposes of this Act, to have been appointed by the licensee and
the licensee shall be responsible for the auditor’s costs and
remuneration.
Appointed actuary 
113. Appointment of actuary by an insurer and HMO.
(1) Every insurer and HMO shall, within one month or such
other longer period, not exceeding six months, as the Authority may
determine, of beginning to carry on long-term business, appoint an
actuary as actuary to the insurance business.
83
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) An insurer and HMO shall not appoint a person as actuary
under subsection (1) unless the person is a qualified actuary, and has
consented in writing to the appointment and the Authority has given
its prior written approval to the person’s appointment.
(3) Whenever an appointment under subsection (1) comes to an
end, the insurer and HMO shall, within fourteen days, give a written
notice to the Authority stating the fact.
(4) The insurer and HMO shall, within three months after the
appointment comes to an end, appoint another actuary and shall give
a written notice to the Authority stating the name, qualifications and
experience of the new appointee.
(5) An insurer or HMO that contravenes subsections (1), (2), (3)
and (4) is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.
(6) The Authority may, by regulations, exempt specified types
and descriptions of micro insurance or ganisations and non-life direct
insurers from the requirement to have an actuary.
114. Actuarial investigation and actuarial report.
(1) A licensed insurer or HMO shall—
(a) ensure that its appointed actuary undertakes an actuarial
review of its business and, if required by the regulations or
the Authority, a group actuarial review , in respect of each
financial year; and 
(b) take all reasonable steps to ensure that the appointed
actuary prepares a written actuarial report complying with
the regulations within sufficient time for the insurer or
HMO to submit the actuarial report to the Authority. 
84
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A licensed insurer or HMO shall ensure that the appointed
actuary has access to all documents and records that the actuary
requires to carry out an actuarial investigation and to prepare the
report.
(3) The appointed actuary is entitled to require from a director or
an employee of the insurer or HMO such information and
explanations as the appointed actuary thinks necessary for the
performance of the duties of an actuary.
(4) A licensed insurer or HMO that contravenes subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable to a fine of not exceeding one
thousand currency points. 
PART XII—I NSPECTIONS, ACCESS TO INFORMATION AND ENQUIRIES
115. Authority to inspect licensees.
(1) The Authority shall inspect the af fairs of every licensee at
least once in three years. 
(2) The Authority may, at any time, for the purpose of
performing its function under subsection (1)—
(a) inspect the premises and the business, including the
procedures and controls, of a licensee or a subsidiary or
holding company of a licensee;
(b) inspect any premises or business of a person to whom a
licensee has outsourced any functions or activities; 
(c) inspect the assets, including cash, belonging to or in the
possession of or control of a licensee or any of its
subsidiaries or holding companies;
(d) examine and make copies of documents belonging to or in
the possession or control of a licensee, any of its
subsidiaries or holding companies; or
85
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(e) seek information and explanations from the officers,
employees, agents and representatives of a licensee or any
of its subsidiaries or holding companies. 
(3) The Authority may, at any time before the expiry of three
years, inspect the affairs of a licensee if it has reason to believe that
the—
(a) the interests of the policyholders, shareholders or members
of the public could be prejudiced; 
(b) the licensee is unable to meet his or her obligations under
the Act;
(c) the licensee has not complied with the provisions of this
Act; 
(d) the licensee is not complying with anti-money laundering
and combating financing of terrorism laws; 
(e) any other reason.
(4) The Authority may appoint competent persons to carry out
the inspection on its behalf. 
(5) The person appointed to inspect under this section may
question any officer of the licensee under oath. 
(6) The licensee shall cooperate with the person appointed to
inspect under this section by providing him or her full access to
books, records, files and other documents which are relevant to the
inspection, and any person who fails to cooperate commits an
offence. 
(7) The Authority shall inform the licensee of the conclusions
reached following the inspection and may require the licensee to
comply, within a period it may specify, with any directive it may issue
to remedy defects disclosed by the inspection. 
86
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(8) The Authority shall give reasonable notice to the licensee or
other person of its intention to exercise its powers under this section
except that where it appears to the Authority that the circumstances
so justify, the Authority may exercise its powers without giving
notice of its intention to do so.
(9) The Authority shall provide a licensee with a written report
summarising the outcomes of every inspection that it undertakes.
(10) A person who prevents the Authority or an inspector from
performing the duties under this section commits an offence and is
liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points. 
116. Notice to provide information or produce documents.
(1) Where reasonably required by the Authority for the
performance of its functions under this Act or any other written law,
the Authority may, by notice in writing given to a person specified in
subsection (2), require the person to—
(a) provide specified information or information of a specified
description; or 
(b) produce specified documents or documents of a specified
description. 
(2) A notice under subsection (1)—
(a) may be issued to—
(i) a licensee; 
(ii) a former licensee; 
(iii) a person the Authority reasonably believes to be
carrying on, or to have at any time carried on,
unauthorised business; 
(iv) a related party in relation to a person specified in
subparagraph (i), (ii) or (iii); or 
87
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(v) to any person who the Authority reasonably believes
is in possession of the information or documents; and 
(b) shall specify the place where and the period within which
the information or documents shall be provided or
produced. 
(3) The Authority may require—
(a) any information or documents provided or produced under
this section to be— 
(i) provided or produced in such form as the Authority
may specify; and 
(ii) verified or authenticated in such manner as the
Authority may reasonably specify; 
(b) that the information to be provided to, or the documents be
produced to a person specified in the notice; and 
(c) that the person to whom the notice is issued, or a person
who is or has been a director, auditor or actuary provides
such explanations relating to the information or documents
as the Authority may reasonably require. 
(4) The Authority may take copies or extracts of any document
produced under this section. 
(5) Where a person claims a lien on a document, its production
under this section is without prejudice to that lien. 
(6) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply
with a notice issued under this section commits an offence and is
liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand five
hundred currency points. 
88
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
PART XIII—R EMEDIAL MEASURES AND ENFORCEMENT
117. Application of this Part to financial institutions holding
bancassurance authorisation.
Except as expressly provided, this Part does not apply to a financial
institution holding a bancassurance authorisation.
118. Recovery plans.
The Authority may require a licensee to prepare a recovery plan if the
Authority has reasonable grounds to believe that one or more of the
following applies—
(a) the licensee has breached or is likely to breach solvency
control levels specified in regulations made under section
48(3);
(b) the business of the licensee has not been, or is not being
conducted in a prudent manner or in accordance with sound
insurance principles; 
(c) the licensee is carrying on or is likely to carry on its
licensed business in a manner detrimental to the interests of
its policyholders or prospective policyholders or , in the
case of a HMO, its members or prospective members, or
the public interest; or
(d) the licensee has failed or is failing to comply with any
requirement of this Act or any condition of its licence.
119. Recovery plan to be approved by the Authority.
(1) A licensee shall, within such period as the Authority may
require the licensee, provide a recovery plan to the Authority .
(2) The Authority shall, after receiving the recovery plan, inform
the licensee whether the Authority is satisfied with the recovery plan
no longer meets the purpose or requirements upon which it was
approved.
89
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) Where the Authority is not satisfied with the recovery plan,
the Authority may require the licensee to amend the recovery plan
and to resubmit the plan to the Authority for approval within a period
specified by the Authority. 
(4) A licensee may amend its recovery plan only with the written
approval of the Authority.
(5) Where, at any time, the Authority is no longer satisfied that
the recovery plan, the Authority may, by written notice, require the
licensee to amend the plan in the manner specified by the Authority
and to resubmit the plan to the Authority for approval within a
reasonable time that the Authority may specify. 
120. Licensee to comply with recovery plan.
Every licensee shall, after the recovery plan has been approved by the
Authority, comply with the plan.
Directives 
121. Directives to licensees.
(1) Where the Authority—
(a) has reasonable grounds to believe that—
(i) the licensee has departed substantially from the most
recent business plan submitted to the Authority; 
(ii) the governance structure of the licensee is no longer
appropriate having regard to the nature, scale and
complexity of its business and the risks to which it is
exposed; 
(iii) one of the grounds specified in section 118 applies to
the licensee; or 
(b) whether as a result of inspection or otherwise, has identified a
matter that, in its opinion, represents a supervisory risk,
the Authority may issue a directive for the better carrying into effect
the provisions of this Act. 
90
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A licensee that fails to comply with a directive issued under
this section is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency
points. 
122. Directives by Authority to persons carrying on unauthorised
business. 
(1) The Authority shall issue a written directive to a person
carrying on, or that has carried on, unauthorised business requiring
the person to cease carrying on the unauthorised business concerned
or to take such action as the Authority considers necessary to protect
the property of, or in the custody, possession or control of, the person
or the interests of persons with whom the person has carried on the
unauthorised business.
(2) A person who fails to comply with a directive issued under
subsection (1) is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency
points.
123. Appointment of investigator.
(1)The Authority may appoint one or more competent persons as
an investigator to conduct an investigation on its behalf— 
(a) with respect to a licensee if it considers that there are
grounds for the Authority to— 
(i) require a recovery plan; 
(ii) issue a directive; 
(iii) apply to the Court for a protection order; or 
(iv) the Authority is of the opinion that it is desirable to
appoint an investigator in the interests of the
customers or creditors or potential customers or
creditors of the licensee or in the public interest; and 
91
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) with respect to any person if it appears to the Authority that
the person is carrying on, or has carried on, unauthorised
business. 
(2) The matters investigated by an investigator appointed under
subsection (1) may include— 
(a) the nature, conduct or financial condition of the person’s
business; 
(b) a particular aspect of the person’s business; 
(c) the ownership or control of the person being investigated; 
(d) in the case of a licensee, whether there are grounds for
taking any of the actions specified in subsection (1)(a)(i) to
(iv); 
(e) whether the person is carrying on, or has carried on,
unauthorised business. 
(3) The Authority may give directions to the investigator
concerning any one or more of the following—
(a) the scope of the investigation; 
(b) the period for the conduct of the investigation; 
(c) the conduct of the investigation; or
(d) the manner in which the investigator shall report to the
Authority. 
(4) Where an investigator is appointed with respect to a former
licensee, an investigation under subsection (2) shall—
(a) in the case of paragraphs (a) and (b), extend only to the
person’s business carried on at any time when the person
was a licensee; and 
(b) in the case of paragraph (c), extend only to the ownership
or control of the person at any time when the person was a
licensee. 
92
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(5) An investigator shall submit a report of his or her
investigation to the Authority and a copy shall be provided to the
licensee or HMO that was the subject of investigation. 
(6)The Regulations may provide for the—
(a) notice to be given to a person to be investigated under this
section; 
(b) conduct of an investigation; 
(c) powers of an investigator appointed under this section; and 
(d) payment of remuneration to the investigator. 
(7) A person who fails to provide all assistance reasonably
required by an investigator appointed under this section commits an
offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not exceeding one
thousand currency points. 
124. Powers of investigator
(1) Subject to subsection (2) and to any direction under section
123(3), an investigator appointed under this section has— 
(a) the power to require the person under investigation or any
person connected with the person under investigation to
attend before the investigator to answer questions; and 
(b) the powers of the Authority to require the provision of
information or documents 
(2) The investigator may only exercise the powers under
subsection (1) to the extent that the investigator considers it necessary
for the purposes of the investigation. 
(3) An investigator appointed under section 123 may, if the
investigator considers it necessary for the purposes of the
investigation, on giving written notice to the person concerned, also
investigate the business of any person who is, or at any relevant time
has been a—
93
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) member of the group of which the person under
investigation is a part; or 
(b) partnership of which the person under investigation is a
member.
Management take-over
125. Management takeover.
(1) The Authority may, on any ground specified in subsection
(2), appoint a person to be known as a statutory manager to manage,
control and direct the business and af fairs of a licensee and to take
custody of its assets.
(2) The following grounds are specified for the purposes of
subsection (1)—
(a) the licence of the licensee has been revoked under this Act; 
(b) in the opinion of the Authority— 
(i) in the case of an insurer, the insurer has breached or
is likely to breach a solvency control level specified
in regulations made under section 48(3); 
(ii) the licensee is conducting business in a manner
contrary to this Act; 
(iii) the continuation by the licensee of its activities is
detrimental to the interests of its customers; 
(iv) the licensee is engaged in or is knowingly facilitating
criminal activities.
(3) The statutory manager of a licensee shall have the power
to—
94
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(a) continue or discontinue any of its operations as a licensee
notwithstanding the revocation of its licence; 
(b) employ necessary staff;
(c) execute any instrument in the name of the licensee;
(d) initiate, defend and conduct in its name any action or
proceeding to which the licensee may be a party;
(e) appoint an advisory board
(f) revoke a licence; 
(g) sell or otherwise dispose of any of the property of the
licensee and any subsidiaries and holding companies; or 
(h) do any other act which is necessary to enable the statutory
manager to execute his or her obligations under this section
or section 126. 
(4) The statutory manager may, after his or her appointment,
appoint an auditor to perform such functions as the statutory manager
may consider appropriate. 
(5) The Authority shall upon appointing a statutory manager of
a licensee, immediately inform the public. 
(6) Upon appointment of a statutory manager , the board of
directors of the licensee shall stand suspended. 
(7) A statutory manager shall have the functions of the board of
directors of the licensee, including the board’s powers of delegation
and use of the seal. 
(8) A statutory manager shall, upon assuming the management,
control and conduct of the af fairs and business of a licensee,
discharge his or her duties with diligence with due regard to the
interests of the licensee, its policy holders and other creditors. 
95
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(9) A statutory manager shall hold office on such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed in the instrument of appointment,
and in any case, at the cost of the licensee. 
(10) The Authority shall oversee and give general direction to
the statutory manager in the performance of his or her duties under
this Part. 
126. Duties of a statutory manager.
(1) Where a licensee complies with the prudential requirements
set out in this Act within the period specified in this Part, the
Authority shall request the shareholders of the licensee, subject to the
provisions on appointment of the board directors, to appoint an
interim board of directors, charged with the management and control
of the licensee.
(2) The interim board of directors appointed under this section
shall hold office on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed
in the instrument of appointment, and in any case, at the cost of the
licensee.
(3) Where, within six months of its appointment, the Authority
is of the opinion that the interim board of directors is managing the
licensee in accordance with prudential requirements, the Authority
shall request the shareholders of the licensee, subject to the provisions
on appointment of board of directors, to confirm the appointment of
each eligible individual director.
(4) The duties of a statutory manager shall include—
(a) tracing and preserving all the property and assets of the
licensee;
(b) recovering debts and other sums of money due and owing
to the licensee;
96
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(c) evaluating the capital structure and management of the
licensee and recommending to the Authority any
restructuring or reorganization which he or she considers
necessary and which, subject to the provisions of any other
written law, may be implemented by him or her on behalf
of the licensee;
(d) entering into contracts in the ordinary course of the
business of the licensee including raising of funds by
borrowing on such terms as he or she may consider
reasonable;
(e) obtaining from any of ficers or employees of the licensee
any documents, records, accounts, statements or
information relating to its business;
(f) issuing a new balance sheet and profit and loss accounts; 
(g) making reports to the Authority on the dischar ge of his or
her duties under this Act; and
(h) any other duties that may be assigned to him or her by the
Authority.
(5) For the purposes of dischar ging his or her functions under
this section, the statutory manager may declare a moratorium on the
payment by the licensee of its liabilities to depositors and other
creditors.
(6) The declaration of a moratorium shall—
(a) be applied equally and without discrimination to all classes
of creditors;
97
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) limit the maximum rate of interest which shall accrue on
deposits and other debts payable by the institution during
the period of the moratorium to the minimum rate as may
be prescribed by the Authority notice for the purposes of
this section except that this paragraph shall not be
construed so to impose an obligation on the licensee to pay
interest or interest at a higher rate to any depositor or
creditor than would otherwise have been the case;
(c) suspend the running of time for the purposes of any law of
limitation in respect of any claim by any depositor or
creditor of the institution; or
(d) cease to apply upon the termination of the manager’s
appointment in which case the rights and obligations of the
licensees, its policyholders and creditors shall, except to the
extent provided in paragraphs (b) and (c), be the same as if
there had been no declaration under this subsection.
(7) A statutory manager may for the purposes of exercising his
duties under this Act require any person who has at any time been an
officer or director of the licensee to provide the statutory manager
with information relating to business of the financial institution.
(8) Any person who wilfully fails, refuses or neglects to provide
any information requested under subsection (4) of this section
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
two hundred and fifty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding
two years or both.
127. Removal and termination of statutory manager. 
(1) The Authority may remove a statutory manager for failure to
perform his or her duties or for another good cause and appoint
another suitably qualified and experienced person to act as statutory
manager in place of the statutory manager removed.
98
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) The Authority may, by written notice, terminate the
appointment of the statutory manager and the statutory management
process if it is of the opinion that—
(a) the purpose of the statutory management has been achieved
or cannot be achieved; or 
(b) the licensee should be wound up under Part XIV . 
(3) On the termination of the statutory management, unless
proceedings for the winding up of the licensee under Part XIV are
commenced, the management of the licensee revests in the board of
directors.
128. Application for and grant of pr otection order.
(1) The Authority may apply to the court for an order under this
section with respect to a licensee or a person that is carrying on, or
has carried on, unauthorised business.
(2) Before the Authority applies for a protection order in respect
of a licensee or a person carrying on unauthorised business, the
Authority must be of the opinion that the order is necessary to protect
or preserve the business or property of the person with respect to
whom the application is made, or the interests of the person’ s
customers, prospective customers, creditors or the public.
PART XIV—W INDING UPO F LICENSEES AND OTHER MATTERS
129. Winding up.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 2012 to
the contrary, an insurer carrying on life insurance business shall not
be wound up voluntarily without the prior written approval of the
Authority except for the purposes of effecting an amalgamation or
transfer.
99
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
130. Powers to wind up a licensee.
(1) The Authority is the only body authorised to wind up a
licensee.  
(2) A winding up petition relating to a licensee shall be referred
to the Authority which shall decide whether to handle the petition or
give permission for the petitioner to proceed with the court process. 
(3) The winding up procedures for licensees shall be prescribed
by regulations. 
131. Winding up by the Authority.
(1) The Authority may wind up the business of a licensee
where—
(a) the licensee is carrying on insurance business without being
licensed under this Act;
(b) the licensee has not complied with the prescribed paid-up
capital or security deposit requirements under this Act, or
where the margin of solvency of the licensee is less than
that specified under this Act;  
(c) in the absence of an appeal or dismissal of an appeal,
revocation of a licence takes place;
(d) the licensee is not able to meet its obligations to a
policyholder under an insurance contract; or 
(e) the Authority believes it is just and equitable and in the
interests of the policyholders to wind up the licensee.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Companies Act 2012
and the Insolvency Act 2011, in the winding up of an insurer or
HMO, insurance claims shall have priority and the assets of the
company, shall first be applied in satisfying the company’s liabilities
under insurance contracts after payment of the properly incurred costs
and expenses of the winding up.
100
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
PART XV—G ENERAL PROVISIONS
132. Requirement to consult.
(1) Before making, amending or replacing any regulation or
issuing any guidance, the Authority shall—
(a) provide persons that the Authority considers will be
substantially affected with a copy of the proposed—
(i) regulations or guidance; 
(ii) amendments to the regulations or guidance; or
(iii) replacement regulations or guidance; 
(b) give those persons a reasonable opportunity to make
written representations to the Authority; and
(c) consider any written representations that it receives. 
(2) The Authority may comply with its obligations under—
(a) subsection (1)(a), by publishing the relevant documents on
its internet site; and
(b) sub section (1), in respect of a person by consulting with
any professional or trade association of which the person is
a member and considering representations by that
association.
(3) The Authority may provide a response to any written
representations that it receives. 
133. Insurable interest policies.
(1) A policy of insurance shall not be issued to any person on the
life of any person where that person has no insurable interest in the
life or event.
101
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) For purposes of subsection (1), an insurable interest shall be
deemed to be had by—
(a) a parent of a minor or the guardian of a minor on the life of
a minor;
(b) a husband, on the life of his wife;
(c) a wife, on the life of her husband;
(d) any person on the life of another upon whom he or she is
wholly or in part dependent for support or education;
(e) a company or other person, on the life of an officer or
employee of the company or that other person;
(f) a person who has a pecuniary interest in, the duration of the
life of another person, in the life of that person to the extent
only of that pecuniary interest at the outset.
134. Protection of information from disclosure.
A member of the Board, staff of the Authority or any person
performing a function or duty under this Act, who receives
information in the dischar ge of his or her functions under this Act,
shall treat the information which comes to the knowledge of the
person as confidential and shall not disclose the information unless
required by law.
135. Ombudsman to handle complaints and disputes.
(1) There is established an Ombudsman to arbitrate complaints
and disputes concerning licensees and the general public.
(2) Regulations shall prescribe—
(a) the procedures for the arbitration by the Ombudsman of
complaints and disputes concerning licensees referred to
the Authority;
(b) the nature of complaints and disputes subject to arbitration;
(c)  the fees payable in respect of arbitration.
102
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(3) Until the establishment of the Ombudsman, the Authority
shall perform the functions of the Ombudsman. 
136. Insurance Appeals Tribunal.
(1) The Insurance Appeals Tribunal established under the
repealed Act is continued in existence in accordance with this Act.  
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of five persons with professional
qualifications and experience relating to the functions of the
Authority, one of whom shall be an advocate.
(3) At least two of the members of the Tribunal shall be women.
(4) The Minister shall appoint one of the members to be the
chairperson of the Tribunal.
(5) The Tribunal shall conduct its business on an ad hoc basis.
(6) Expenses of the administration of the Tribunal shall be borne
by the Authority or as shall be determined in the Regulations. 
137. Tribunal to review decisions of the Authority.
(1) A person aggrieved by any decision of the Authority may,
within one month from the date the decision is communicated by the
Authority, appeal to the Tribunal against the decision.
(2) The T ribunal shall not decide any matter brought before it
without giving the appellant an opportunity to be heard.
(3) The Tribunal may uphold, reverse, revoke or vary a decision
of the Authority or remit the matter back to the Authority for
reconsideration, with or without guidance. 
(4) A decision of the T ribunal shall be in writing and shall be
communicated within 90 days after an appeal is made to the Tribunal.
103
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(5) A party aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal, may
within 30 days of the date of communication of the decision of the
Tribunal, lodge a notice of appeal with the High Court.
(6) The Authority shall bear the expenses of the administration
of the Tribunal.
(7) The Minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations
prescribing matters to enable the effective operation of the Tribunal.
(8) The Regulations made under subsection (7) shall be laid
before Parliament.
138. Policyholders’ Compensation Fund.
(1) The Policyholders’ Compensation Fund established under
the repealed Act is continued in existence in accordance with this Act. 
(2) The function of the Policyholders’ Compensation Fund is to
build a reserve fund that can be used to provide a level of
compensation, but not necessarily full compensation, to eligible
unpaid claimants under policies issued by licensees that enter into
liquidation under the Insolvency Act, 2011.
(3) The Policyholders’ Compensation Fund shall be managed by
a board of trustees.
(4) The members of the board of trustees shall be appointed by
the Minister and the composition and the terms and conditions of
service of the board of trustees shall be prescribed by regulations.
(5) The money of the Policyholders’ Compensation Fund shall
consist of—
(a) a premium levied on licensees, after consultation with
licensees on recommendation of the Authority;
104
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) loans, grants, gifts, donations; and
(c) money from any other source, approved by the Minister in
writing.
139. Regulations on Policyholders’ Compensation Fund.
The manner of governing the Policyholders’ Compensation Fund, the
entitlement to payments from the Fund and payments out of the Fund
shall be prescribed by regulations.
Insurance Training College 
140. Establishment of Insurance Training College.
(1) There is established an Insurance T raining College
responsible for insurance training in Uganda. 
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the Insurance Institute  of
Uganda existing immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall be transformed into the Insurance Training College. 
(3) The Minister, on the recommendation of the Authority, shall
appoint the Board of the College. 
(4) The College shall receive and administer the Insurance
Training levy specified in section 141.
(5) The insurance training levy shall be applied by the College
to fund insurance training for licensees and for the certification of
training programs for licensees provided by the College or other body
specified by the Minister, by statutory instrument.
(6) The College shall, within ninety days of the end of the
financial year, file with the Authority, its audited accounts for the
preceding year.
105
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(7) The accounts of the College shall be audited in accordance
with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.
(8) Every person licensed under this Act shall be a member of
the Insurance Training College.
(9) Regulations may be made by statutory instrument on the
recommendation of the Authority, prescribing—
(a) the governance requirements for the College;
(b) the procedures for the safeguarding of the assets of the
College;
(c) the manner of preparation, auditing and submission to the
Authority of financial statements; and 
(d) such other matters as the Minister considers appropriate.
141. Insurance training levy.
(1) Every insurer and HMO, shall remit to the College, a levy on
the gross direct premium written by licensees.
(2) The levy shall be charged on the policyholders and collected
by licensees.
(3) The levy shall be at a rate prescribed by the Authority, by
Regulations.
(4) The insurance training levy shall be applied by the College
to fund insurance training, examination, certification and registration
of licensees.
142. Prohibition of misleading advertisements.
Any person who—
(a) by advertisement, statement, promise or forecast which he
or she knows to be misleading, false or deceptive;
106
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) by dishonest concealment of facts; or
(c) by reckless making of an advertisement, statement, promise
or forecast which is misleading, false or deceptive,
concludes or offers to enter into a contract, transaction or
arrangement with an insurer or any other person relating to insurance
business commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding five
hundred currency points.
143. Annual and other reports.
(1) The Authority shall, not later than six months after the end of
each financial year, make and submit to the Minister, a report on the
activities of the Authority during that financial year.
(2) The Authority shall submit to the Minister, together with the
report referred to in subsection (1), the audited financial statements of
the Authority, and the auditor’s report on those statements.
(3) The Board shall also submit to the Minister, such other
reports on its activities or on any other matter as the Minister may,
from time to time, require.
(4) Any report made under this section shall be published by the
Authority in a manner determined by the Authority. 
144. Service of notices on the Authority. 
Any notice or other document required to be served on the Authority
may be served by delivery at the office of the Chief Executive Officer
and obtaining evidence of receipt.
145. Protection from liability.
(1) A member of the Board shall not be personally liable in
respect of any act or omission done in good faith in the performance
of his or her functions under this Act.
107
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) An officer, a member of staff, any person acting on behalf of
the Authority or any person performing his or her functions under this
Act shall not be personally liable in respect of any act or omission
done in good faith in the performance of his or her functions under
this Act.
146. Offences and penalties.
(1) A person who carries on or is privy to the carrying on of any
business under this Act under a company established contrary to this
Act is liable to a fine of not less than one hundred currency points and
not more than five hundred currency points or to imprisonment for a
term of not less than three months and not more than six months or to
both the fine and imprisonment.
(2) In the alternative to the punishment provided under
subsection (1), a licence of a person convicted under that subsection
shall be cancelled, and that person shall be disqualified from
acquiring a licence for five years and thereafter shall not be issued a
licence without the approval of the Minister.
(3) A person who, being a manager or officer of a company
licensed under this Act—
(a) fails to take any reasonable steps to secure compliance with
the requirements of this Act;
(b) makes any statement or gives any information which is
false, in answer for information required under any
provisions of this Act;
(c) is privy to the furnishing of any false information under this
Act, 
is liable to a fine of not less than one hundred and fifty currency
points.
108
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(4) An insurance or reinsurance company which fails to comply
with an order issued by the Minister or the Authority under this Act
or contravenes any provision of this Act commits an offence and is
liable to—
(a) a public or private admonition;
(b) a fine of not more than twenty five currency points;
(c) suspension or revocation of the licence.
(5) An insurance intermediary which fails to comply with an
order issued by the Minister or the Authority under this Act or
contravenes any provision of this Act commits an offence and is
liable to—
(a) a private or public admonition;
(b) a fine of not more than twenty five currency points;
(c) suspension or revocation of the licence.
(6) Where an officer of a company under this Act authorises the
contravention of or contravenes any provision of this Act, he or she
shall be personally liable to the penalty specified in relation to the
contravention.
(7) An insurer shall not pay any commission or remuneration to
any intermediary who is not licensed under this Act and an insurer
who violates this section is liable to a fine of twenty  percent of the
premium received or the fine imposed under section (4) (b),
whichever is higher.
147. Display of a licence.
(1) A licensee shall display his or her licence prominently at the
principal place of business in a part to which the public can have
access and shall display a copy of the licence in each branch of the
business in Uganda.
109
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(2) A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not
exceeding fifty currency points.
148. Publication of details relating to licensees.
The Authority shall publish in an appropriate manner and form the
details of licensees and the scope of the licences granted under this
Act. 
149. Consultation of foreign supervisors in relation to applicants
for a licence.
The Authority shall not grant a licence to an applicant for a licence
established outside Uganda unless the Authority consults the
supervisor of the applicant in the country where the applicant is
established. 
150. Compliance with anti money laundering and combating of
terrorism financing. 
Every licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Anti-Money
Laundering Act, 2013 and the laws relating to combating financing of
terrorism.
151. Regulations. 
The Minister shall, in consultation with the Authority , by statutory
instrument make regulations for the better carrying into ef fect the
provisions of this Act.
152. Amendment of Schedules. 
The Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory
instrument amend the Schedules to this Act.
153. Repeal and saving.
(1) The Insurance Act, Cap. 213 is repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), any statutory instrument
made under the Insurance Act, Cap. 213 and is in force immediately
before the commencement of this Act, shall remain in force until
revoked under this Act.
110
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
154. Transfer of assets and liabilities.
All assets, rights and liabilities relating to insurance services to which
the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda was entitled to or
subject to, before the commencement of this Act, shall vest in the
Authority. 
155. Transfer of service contracts. 
Employees of the Authority immediately before the commencement
of this Act whose services are transferred to the Authority shall
transfer to the Authority on similar or better terms than those enjoyed
by those employees before the transfer.
156. Pension fund and retired and redundant employees. 
(1) All former employees of the Authority who at the
commencement of this Act are receiving retirement benefits and
pensions from the Authority shall continue to be paid by the
Authority.
(2) All employees of the Authority who become redundant as a
result of the implementation of section 154 shall be paid the
calculated and ascertained retirement benefits and pension due to
them under the repealed Act.
157. Agreements and licences by the Authority.
All valid—
(a) licences issued by the Authority before the commencement
of this Act; and
(b) agreements entered into by the Authority before the
commencement of this Act, 
shall remain valid and only be modified by the Authority within one
year from the time the Authority commences operations to the extent
that any provisions of the agreements or licences are inconsistent with
this Act.
111
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
158. Pending court proceedings or orders of court. 
(1) Any pending court proceedings, court actions, judgments or
court orders which were enforceable by or against the Authority
immediately before the commencement of this Act, and are connected
with the assets vested in the Authority or the functions of the
Authority, shall be enforceable by or against the Authority as they
would have been enforced by or against the Authority, immediately
before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Any pending court proceedings, judgment or order against
the Authority arising out of matters connected with Authority , shall
continue against the Authority until they are disposed of or satisfied.
112
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
SCHEDULES 
SCHEDULE 1
Section 2
CURRENCY POINT
A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings
113
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
SCHEDULE 2
Section 2 
CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHETHER A PERSON IS A FIT
AND PROPER PERSON TO MANAGE, CONTROL, BECOME A
DIRECTOR, SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDER OR SENIOR
MANAGER OR A LICENSEE.
1. In order to determine, for the purposes of this Act, the professional and
moral suitability of persons proposed to manage or control a licensee, to
become a substantial shareholder , or director, the Authority, shall have
regard to the following qualities, in so far as they are reasonably
determinable, in respect of the person concerned—
(a) his or her general probity;
(b) his or her competence and soundness of judgement for the
fulfilment of the responsibilities of the of fice in question; 
(c) the diligence with which the person concerned is fulfilling or
likely to fulfil those responsibilities; and
(d) whether the interests of policyholders or prospective
policyholders of the licensee are, or are likely to be in any way
threatened by his or her holding that position.
2. For the purposes of and without prejudice to the general effect of
paragraph (1), the Authority may have regard to the previous conduct and
activities of the person concerned in business or financial matters and, in
particular, to any evidence that the person—
(a) has been convicted of the offence of fraud or any other offence
of which dishonesty or violence is an element;
114
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
(b) has contravened any law designed for the protection of members
of the public against financial loss due to the dishonesty or
incompetence of, or malpractice by, persons engaged in the
provision of banking, insurance, investment or other financial
services or the management of companies or against financial
loss due to the conduct of a discharged or undischarged bankrupt;
(c) was a director of a licensee that has been liquidated or is under
liquidation or management of the Authority or under
receivership;
(d) has taken part in any business practice that in the opinion of the
Authority, was deceitful or oppressive, fraudulent, prejudicial or
otherwise improper whether unlawful or not, or which otherwise
reflect discredit on his or her method of conducting business;
(e) has engaged or taken part in or been associated with any other
business practices or otherwise conducted himself or herself in
such manner as to cause doubt on his or her competence and
soundness of judgement;
(f) has defaulted on a loan or a company in which he or she is a
director has defaulted on a loan.
3. The Authority may request any person to furnish such additional
information as may be necessary in determining the professional or moral
suitability of that person.
115
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
SCHEDULE 3
Section 19 
MEETINGS AND SEAL OF THE AUTHORITY
1. The Board shall meet for the discharge of its functions as often as
business requires, and in any case the Board shall meet at least once in every
three months; and the Chairperson shall convene a meeting whenever at
least three members of the Board request in writing for a meeting.
2. The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson shall preside at all meetings
of the Board and; in the absence of both, the members shall elect one of the
members to preside.
3. A quorum at any meeting of the Board shall be four members.
4. A decision on a question proposed at any meeting of the Board shall
be determined by consensus, and where there is no consensus, the decision
shall be by a simple majority of the members present and voting; and in the
case of an equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a casting vote
in addition to his or her deliberative vote.
5. The Board shall cause to be kept, minutes of all the proceedings of its
meetings.
6. The Board may invite any number of persons to act as consultants or
advisers at any of its meetings.
7. A member of the Board who has any personal interest in any
transaction or matter before the Board shall disclose the nature of his or her
interest to the Board and shall be disqualified from taking part in the
deliberations of the Board with respect to that transaction or matter if it is a
contract and in any other case, if the Board decides that the nature of the
interest might prejudice the consideration of the matter.
116
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017
8. Subject to this Act and regulations made under it, the Board may
regulate its own procedure.
9. The application of the seal of the Authority on any document shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chief Executive Officer and the
Secretary to the Authority; and, in the absence of the Chief Executive
Officer, the person acting shall sign in his or her place, and the person
performing the functions of the Secretary shall sign in the absence of the
Secretary.
10. The signature of the Chief Executive Officer and the Secretary to the
Authority shall be independent of the signing by any other person who may
sign the document as a witness.
11. A document purporting to be an instrument issued by the Board and
sealed by the common seal of the Authority , authenticated in the manner
provided in this Schedule, shall be received in evidence and deemed to be
such an instrument without further proof, unless the contrary is shown.
117
Cross References
Anti money laundering Act, 2013 
Companies Act, 2012
Cooperatives Societies Act, Cap.112 
Financial Institutions Act, 2004 
Insolvency Act, 2011
Public Finance Management Act, 2015 
118
Act 6 Insurance Act 2017