1TIB REP{.IBLrc OT UGAtriIDA
THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021.
PARLIAMEN T LIBRARY
P.O. BOX 7178, KAMPALA
* l0JAN2022 *
ACC NO......
CALL NO:.....................
PARLTAMENT LIBRARY
P.Ll. BOx 7178. KAMPALA
* ,':li? *
ACC Ne.
cALL NO:.......
t?
TTIB R"PI.JBLIC OF UGAI{DA
I stcNrrv my assent to the bill.
I
President
"lDate of assent 2 ) aop. a
Act 2021
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
l. Commencement.
2. Amendment of section I of the National Social Security Fund Act
3. Amendment of section 3 of principalAct.
4. Amendment of section 7 of principal Act.
5. Amendment of section 9 of principalAct.
6. Repeal of section 10 of principal Act.
7. [nsertion of section l3,{ in principalAct.
8. Amendment of section l9 of principal Act.
9. Amendment of section 20 of principal Act.
10. Insertion ofsection 20A in principalAct.
I l. Amendment of section 2l of principalAct.
12. Amendment of section23 of principal Act.
13. Substitution of section 30 of principalAct.
14. Amendment of section 3 I of principal Act.
15. Amendment of section 34 of principal Act.
16. Amendment of section 35 of principalAct.
National Soctal Security Fund (Amendment) Act
THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND
(AMENDMENT) ACI 202r
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
17. Amendment of section 36 of principal Act.
18. Amendment of section 39 of principalAct.
19. Substution of section 40 of principal Act.
20. Amendment of section 4l of principal Act.
21. Amendmentof section43 of principalAct.
22. Amendment of section 44 of principal Act.
23. Amendment of section 45 of principal Act.
24. Insertion of section 54 in principalAct.
25. lnsertion of Third Schedule in principal Act.
SCHEDULE
THIRD SCHEDULE CURRENCY POTNT
,E
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
TTIB RPI.,BLIC OF UGAITIDA
THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY F'UND
(AMENDMENT) LCT,202I
An Act to amend the National Social Security Fund Act, Cap.
222; to establish a stakeholder board; to provide for mandatory
contributions by all workers, regardless of the size of the enterprise
or number of employees; to provide for voluntary contributions to
the fund; to provide formidterm access to member's contributions;
to provide for a five year term of office for the managing director
and deputy managing director; to empower the Board to use
in-house expertise and fund managers in the investments of
scheme funds; to empower the board to introduce new benefits in
consultation with the Minister; and for related matters.
Dare op AsseNT:
Date of Commencement,
BE IT ENACTED by Parliament as follows:
"1. Commencement.
(l) Subject to subsection (2), this Act shall come into force
upon publication in the Gazette.
ACC NL.........
CALL NO:.......
PARLIAM
. PO. BOX
ENT
7178, K
LIt,RARY
AMPALA
...-...a...-...
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(2) The Minister shall, in consultation with the board, by
statutory instrument, commence section 20A (l) and (2) within sixty
days from the date of publication of this Act in the Gazette."
2. Amendment of section I of the National Social Security
Fund Act.
The National Social Security Fund Act, in this Act referred to as the
principal Act is amended in section l-
(a) by substituting for paragraph (f), the following-
"(0 "contributing employer" means an employer
registered under section 7;";
(b) by substituting for paragraph (g), the following-
"(g) "contribution" includes standard contribution,
voluntary contribution and spec ial contribution;";
(c) by inserting immediately after paragraph (g) the
following-
"(ga) "corruption" has the meaning assigned to it in the
Anti-comrption Act, 2009 ;" ;
"(gb) "currency point" has the value assigned to it in the
Third Schedule to this Act;";
(d) by substituting for paragraph (k), the following-
"(k) "employer"includes-
(i) the Government;
(ii) a company registered or incorporated under
the Companies Act, 2012;
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(iii) a partnership registered under the Partnership
Act,2010;
(iv) a trustee incorporated under the Trustees
lncorporation Act, Cap. 165;
(v) a business registered under any other law
for the time being in force goveming the
establishment of business entities;
(vi) the governing body of an unincorporated
association; and
(vii) a manager or a subcontractor who provides
employees for the principal contractor; but
where a person enters into a contract by which
some other person is to provide employees for
any lawful purpose of the manager and it is
not clear from the contract which of the two
persons is the employer, the manager shall be
deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be the
employer;"; and
(e) by inserting immediately after paragraph (v) the
following-
"(va) "person with disability" has the meaning assigned to
it in the Persons with Disabilities Act,2020;"
3. Amendment of section 3 of principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by substituting for section 3 the
following-
"3. Board of directors.
(l) The fund shall be governed by a stakeholder board
of directors appointed by the Minister and consisting of-
(a) a chairperson;
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(b) the permanent secretary of the ministry responsible
for labour;
(c) the permanent secretary of the ministry responsible
for finance;
(d) four representatives of employees nominated by the
Federations of Labour Unions;
(e) two representatives of employers nominated by the
Federation of Uganda Employers; and
(0 the managing director who shall be an ex-officio
member without the right to vote.
(2) A member of the board, except those stated under
subsection (l) (b), (c) and (f) shall hold office for a term of three
years and may be reappointed for one more term only.
(3) Amember of the board may be removed from office
by the Minister for-
(a) abuse of office;
(b) corruption;
(c) incompetence;
(d) physical or mental incapacity that renders the
member incapable of performing the functions of his
or her office;
(e) misbehaviour or misconduct;
(0 being adjudged bankrupt by a court of law;
(g) conviction for an offence involving dishonesty,
fraud or moral turpitude; or
(h) failure to declare any conflict of interest in the
execution of a member's mandate as a member of
the board.
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(4) A member of the board may resign from the board
by giving notice of not less than one month in writing addressed
to the Minister.
(5) A member of the board shall hold office on terms
and conditions specified in his or her instrument of appointment.
(6) The Minister shall ensure that-
(a) a member of the board is a person of high moral
character and proven integrity;
(b) there is consideration of persons with disabilities,
balance of gender, skills and experience among the
members of the board; and
(c) the members of the board provided for under
subsection (1) (e), are contributing employers under
section 7."
4. Amendment of section 7 of principalAct.
The principal Act is amended in section 7-
(a) by substituting for subsection (1), the following-
"(l) Every eligible employee shall register as a
member of the fund and shall make regular contributions
to the fund in accordance with this Act and regulations
made under this Act "'
(b) by substituting for subsection (2), the following-
*(2) Every employer, irrespective of the number of
employees, shall register with the fund as a contributing
employer and shall make regular contributions for his or
her employees in accordance with this Act and regulations
made under this Act "'
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(c) by repealing subsection (3);
(d) in subsection (5), by repealing the words "of a class or
description specified in an order made under subsection
(l)"; and
(e) in subsection (7), by repealing the words "of a class or
description specified in an order made under subsection
(I)".
5. Amendment of section 9 of principal Act.
Section 9 of the principal Act is amended by repealing paragraph (b).
6. Repeal of section 10 of principal Act.
Section 10 of the principal Act is repealed.
7. Insertion of section 13A in principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section
l3 the following new section-
'13A. Voluntary contributions.
(1) A member may make voluntary contributions to the
fund over and above his or her standard contributions.
(2) A member who wishes to make a voluntary
contribution under subsection (l) may authorise his or her
employer in writing to deduct an agreed rate from the employee's
wage payment and remit the voluntary contribution to the fund.
(3) An employer authorised by an employee under
subsection (2), shall, for every month during which he or she
pays wages for the member, pay to the fund, within fifteen days
next following the last day of the month for which the relevant
wages are paid, the voluntary contribution of the sum agreed.
a
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
(4) A person who is self-employed may apply for
membership of the fund and shall make voluntary contributions
to the fund.
(5) Notwithstanding subsections (l) and (4), any
other person may apply for membership and make voluntary
contribution to the fund.
(6) An employer who deducts a voluntary contribution
under subsection (2) and fails to remit the contribution to the
fund commits an offence and is liable, on conviction tG-
(a) remit to the fund any outstanding contribution due to
the employee; and
(b) pay a fine of twenty percent of the amount deducted
but not remitted to the fund.
(7) The Minister shall, in consultation with the board,
by regulations, prescribe the procedure for making voluntary
contributions and benefits."
8. Amendment of section 19 of principal Act.
Section 19 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately
after subsection (l), the following new subsection-
"(1a) The board may, in consultation with the Minister, by
statutory instrument, prescribe additional benefits."
9. Amendment of section 20 of principalAct.
Section 20 of the principal Act is amended by repealing subsection
(3).
10. Insertion of section 20A in principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by inserting the following section
immediately after section 20-
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
"20A. Midterm access to benefits.
(1) A member who has made contributions to the fund
shall be allowed midterm access to his or her benefits accrued
from the contributions.
(2) A member who is forty-five years of age and above
and who has made contributions to the fund under section 7 for at
least ten years, is eligible to midterm access to his or her benefits,
of a sum not exceeding20 per cent of his or her accrued benefits.
(3) Amember who--
(a) is a person with disability;
(b) is forty years ofage and above; and
(c) has made contributions to the fund under section 7
for at least ten years,
is eligible to midterm access, of a sum of 50 percent of his or her
accrued benefits.
(4) The Minister shall, in consultation with the board,
prescribe by statutory instrument the terms and conditions and
procedure for accessing the accrued benefits under this section.
(5) The statutory instrument under subsection (4) shall
be laid before Parliament for information."
11. Amendment of section 2l of principal Act.
Section 2l of the principal Act is amended by substituting for
subsection (2), the following-
*(2) Subject to section 19, a person who ceases to be a
member of the fund by virh:e of being employed in excepted
employment shall, if contributions under this Act have been paid
into the fund in respect of that member, be entitled to the full
balance of his or her account in the fund."
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
12. Amendment of section 23 of principalAct.
Section 23 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for
subsection (1), the following-
"(1) Subject to section 19, a member of the fund who
emigrates permanently from Uganda to a country with which
no reciprocal arrangement under this Act has been made, where
contributions under this Act have been paid in respect of that
member to the fund, the member shall be entitled to the full
balance of his or her account in the fund."
13. Substitution of section 30 of principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by substituting for section 30 the
following-
"30. Investment.
( I ) All monies in the fund, including the reserve account,
which are not for the time being required to be applied for the
purpose of the fund shall be invested in such investment as may
be determined by the board in consultation with the Minister
responsible for finance.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law,
the board may use in-house expertise or fund managers in the
investment under subsection (1)."
14. Amendment of section 3l of principalAct.
Section 3l of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the word
"Minister" the words "Minister responsible for finance".
f 5. Amendment of section 34 of principal Act.
Section 34 of the principal Act is amended-
Act 2021
*(2) Amember's account in the fund shall be closed
and his or her membership shall cease on the happening of
any of the following events-
(a) when an emigration grant is paid;
(b) when a member voluntarily opts out of the
fund upon receipt of the member's total age
benefit under section 20 of this Act; or
(c) when a member dies and his or her survivor's
benefits are paid out in accordance with section
24 of this Act."'
(b) by substituting for subsection (3), the following-
"(3) If on the closing of a member's account under
subsection (2), any sum of money is standing to the credit
of his or her account in the fund and is unclaimed in a
subsequent period of seven years, that money shall vest in
the Minister responsible for finance, who shall pay it into
the reserve account."'
(c) by inserting immediately after subsection (3), the
following-
"(3a) The board shall, every year, publish the names
and details of all dormant members'accounts in the fund,
in a newspaper of wide circulation within Uganda."
16. Amendment of section 35 of principal Act.
Section 35 of the principal Act is amended in subsections (1), (2)
(3), (6) and (7) by substituting for the word "Minister", the words
"Minister responsible for fi nance".
National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act
(a) by substituting for subsection (2), the following-
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
17. Amendment of section 36 of principal Act.
Section 36 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the word
"Minister", the words "Minister responsible for finance".
f8. Amendment of section 39 of principal Act.
Section 39 (l) of the principal Act is amended-
(a) by substituting for subsection (1), the following-
"(1) There shall be a managing director of the fund
appointed by the Minister, on the recommendation of the
board."; and
(b) by inserting immediately after subsection ( I ), the following
subsection-
"(la) The managing director appointed under
subsection (l) shall serve for a period of five years and
may be reappointed, subject to satisfactory performance,
for one more term only."
f 9. Substitution of section 40 of principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by substituting for section 40 the
following-
"40. Deputy managing director.
(l) There shall be a deputy managing director of the
fund appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the
board.
(2) The deputy managing director appointed under
subsection (l) shall serve for a period of five years and may be
reappointed, subject to satisfactory performance, for one more
term only."
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
20. Amendment of section 4l of principal Act.
Section 4l of the principal Act is amended-
(a) by substituting for subsection (1), the following-
"(l) The fund shall have a secretary who shall be
appointed by the board, for a term of five years and may
be reappointed subject to satisfactory performance and on
such terms and conditions as are specified in the instrument
of appointment.";
(b) in subsection (2), by deleting the words "the Minister
andt'.
21. Amendment of section 43 of principal Act.
Section 43 of the principal Act is amended in subsection (4) by
substituting for the words "ten thousand shillings or to a term
of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both such fine
and imprisonment", the words "five hundred currency points or
imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both".
22. Amendment of section 44 of principal Act.
Section 44 of the principal Act is amended in subsection (1) by
substituting for the words "ten thousand shillings or to a term of
imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both", the words "five
hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or
both".
23. Amendment of section 45 of principal Act.
Section 45 ofthe principal Act is amended by substituting for the words
"ten thousand shillings or imprisonment not exceeding six months or
to both such fine and imprisonment", the words "five hundred currency
points or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both".
PARLIAMENT LIBRARY
P.O. BOX 7178, KAMPALA
* !r ,lr, lillT
ACC NL
cALL No:..... . ..
t
Act National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Act 2021
24. Insertion of section 54 in principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section
53 the following section-
"54. Amendment of Third Schedule.
The Minister may, by statutory instrument, with the approval of
Cabinet, amend the Third Schedule to this Act."
25. Insertion of Third Schedule in principal Act.
The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after the
Second Schedule, the following Schedule-
..THIRD SCHEDULE
Sections I and 54.
CURRENCY POINT
A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings."
a.
Act
Anti-comrptionAct, 2009,Act 6 of 2009
Companies Act,20l2,Actl of 2012.
Partnership Act, 2010, Act2 of 2010.
Persons with Disabilities Act, Act 3 of 2020.
Trustees lncorporation Act, Cap. 165.
National Soctal Security Fund (Amendment) Act
Cross References
2021
I
-,t
THE RPI'BIIC OF I.ICTANI}A
This printed impression has been carefully
compared by me with the bill which was
passed by Parliament and found by me to be a
true copy of the bill.
Clerk to Parliament
PARLIAM ENT LTBRARV
PO. BOX 7178. K^MPALA
)t I i, , 7r; ttl-i) .
ACC Nc
CALL NO:...
It
Date of authenticatior, .t ..., t. 1..:. ;.. .{}. :1 j
-.'{p, -